GUDRID THE FAIR

A Tale of the Discovery of America

BY

MAURICE HEWLETT

Author of

  "The Forest Lovers,"
  "The Life and Death of Richard Yea and Nay,"
  "Love and Lucy," etc.

NEW YORK

DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY

1918

Copyright, 1918,

By Dodd, Mead and Company, Inc.

PREFACE

This tale is founded upon two sagas, which have been translated literally and without attempt
to accord their discrepancies by York Powell and Vigfussen in their invaluable _Origines Icelandicae_.
As well as those versions I have had another authority to help me, in Laing's _Sea-Kings of
Norway_.  I have blent the two accounts into one, and put forward the result with this word
of explanation, which I hope will justify me in the treatment I have given them.

I don't forget that a "saga" is history, and that these sagas in particular furnish an account
of the first discovery of America, no less a thing.  Nevertheless, while I have been scrupulous
in leaving the related facts as I found them, I have not hesitated to dwell upon the humanity
in the tales, and to develop that as seemed fitting.  I don't think that I have put anything
into the relation which is not implied in the few words accorded me by the text.  I believe
that everything I give Gudrid and Freydis, Karlsefne and Leif and Eric Red to say or to do
can be made out from hints, which I have made it my business to interpret.  Character makes
plot in life as well as in fiction, and a novelist is not worthy of his hire who can't weave
a tale out of one or two people to whom he has been able to give life. All romantic invention
proceeds from people or from atmosphere. Therefore, while I have shown, I hope, due respect
to the exploration of America, I admit that my tale turns essentially upon the explorers of
it.  My business as a writer of tales has been to explore them rather than Wineland the Good.
I have been more interested in Gudrid's husbands and babies than I had need to be as an historian.
I am sure the tale is none the worse for it--and anyhow I can't help it.  If I read of a woman
called Gudrid, and a handsome woman at that, I am bound to know pretty soon what colour her
hair was, and how she twisted it up.  If I hear that she had three husbands and outlived them
all I cannot rest until I know how she liked them, how they treated her; what feelings she
had, what feelings they had.  So I get to know them as well as I know her--and so it goes on.
Wineland does not fail of getting discovered, but meantime some new people have been born into
the world who do the business of discovering while doing their own human business of love and
marriage and childbirth.

All this, I say, is implicit in the saga-history.  So it is, but it has to be looked for. 
The saga listeners, I gather, took character very much for granted, as probably Homer's audience
did.  Odysseus was full of wiles, Achilles was terrible, Paris "a woman-haunting cheat," Gunnar
of Lithend a poet and born fighter, Nial a sage, and so on.  The poet gave them more than that,
of course.  Poetry apart, he did not disdain psychology.  There is plenty psychology in both
_Iliad_ and _Odyssey_--less in the sagas, but still it is there.  And when you come to know
the persons of these great inventions there is as much psychology as any one can need, or may
choose to put there--as much as there is in _Hamlet_, as much as there is in _La Guerre et
La Paix_.

In Kormak's Saga, for instance, which I put forward some years ago as _A Lover's Tale_, is
there no psychology?  It is no way out of it to put down Kormak's tergiversations to sorcery.
I doubt if that was good enough for the men who first heard the tale; it is certainly no good
to us.  In the strange barbaric recesses of the tale of Gunnar Helming and Frey's wife, what
are we to make of it all unless we reckon with the states of poor Sigrid's soul, married to
a gog-eyed wooden god?  How came Halgerd to betray Gunnar to his foes, how came Nial to be
burned in his bed?  Can one read _Laxdale_ and not desire to read through it into the proud
heart of Gudrun?

And having once begun with them one could go on, I believe, until the hearts of all those fine,
straight-dealing people were as plain to us as those of our superfine, sophisticated moderns.
For Nature is still our mother and mistress, no less now than she ever was--and that's a good
thing for the story-reader as well as for the story-teller.

Out of the Saga of Thorgils, which is a tale of Greenland's exploration, I hope that I drew
a portrait of a good Icelander.  Out of Eric's Saga and Karlsefne's Saga combined I believe
there is a no less faithful picture of a good Icelandish woman.  Gudrid was wise as well as
fair, if I have read her truly; she was a good woman, wife and mother.  The discovery of Wineland
is to my own feelings quite beside the mark where she is involved; but I have put it all in,
and wish there had been more of it.  Psychology and romantic imagination will not help us much
there.  We want the facts, and they fail us.  All that can be made out is that Karlsefne sailed
up the Hudson.  His Scraelings were Esquimaux.  But who was the black-kirtled woman who appeared
to Gudrid and gave herself the same name?  And where was the Maggoty Sea? And what goaded Freydis
to her dreadful deeds?  I admire Freydis myself; I think she was a _femme incomprise_.  I have
taken pains with Freydis, though personally I had rather been Gudrid's fourth husband than
Freydis's first.

I am not afraid of the accusation of vulgarising the classics.  It is good that they should
be loved, and if simplification and amplification humanise them I can stand the charge with
philosophy.  Of all classics known to me the sagas are the most unapproachable in their naked
strength.  Their frugality freezes the soul; they are laconic to baldness.  I admire strength
with anybody, but the starkness of the sagas shocks me.  When Nial lies down by his old wife's
side with the timbers roaring and crackling over his head, and Skarphedin, his son, says, "Our
father goes early to bed, but that was to be expected, as he is an old man," Professor Ker,
exulting in his strength, finds it admirable.  I say it is inadequate, and not justified to
us by what else the saga tells us of the speaker.  I am sure that Skarphedin had more to say,
or that if he had not the poet could have expressed him better.  It recalls the humorous callousness
of our soldiers, which, nakedly rendered, is often shocking.  This is, however, not really
the point.  Terseness may be dramatic--it often is, as in "Cover her face--mine eyes dazzle--She
died young"--but in narrative it may check instead of provoke the imagination.  But if it provoke,
is it not reasonable to let the imagination go to work upon it?  If Skarphedin indeed took
his father's death in that manner, is one not justified in going to work with Skarphedin, to
find out what manner of man he was who could so express himself in supreme crisis?  I trace
a great deal of our soldiers' crude jesting at death to their Scandinavian blood; and nothing
more intensely and painfully interesting has ever been given to the imagination to work upon
than their conduct in the face of horror and sin of late, so dauntless, so blithe and so grim
as it is.

Where heroism has been so shown on all sides of us in these three dreadful years, it is no
longer possible to pick and choose heroic nations.  One might otherwise have said that no such
heroes were ever given to the world as the heroes of Iceland.  That they are not accepted as
such on all hands is no fault of the literature which presents them; for that literature, like
all great art, makes demands upon its readers.  It hands over the key, but if the lock is stiff
it will not give you oil for the wards.  That you must find for yourself. Oil for the wards
is all I can pretend to here; and if I may say that I have humanised a tale of endurance, and
clothed demigods and shadows in flesh and blood, I shall feel that I have done useful work,
and bear charges of vulgarisation with a philosophy which assures me that the two terms are
much of a muchness.

The great gestures, the large-scale maps, the grand manner are for history and epic, but genre
for the novel--and what _genre_ is so momentous to it as the human?  Let Homer describe the
wrath of Achilles and the passion of Hektor and Andromache.  The novelist will want to know
what Briseïs felt when she was handed from hero to hero, will pore upon the matronly charity
of Theano, the agony of the two young men Achilles slew by Skamander, and find the psychology
of these pawns in the great game as enthralling as that of the high movers.  I confess that
to me Gudrid, the many times a wife and the always sweet and reserved, is more absorbing a
tale than the discovery of Wineland.  I like the two running Scots better than their country,
would barter all Greenland for the tale of the winter sickness in Thorstan Black's house. 
So much apology I feel moved to offer for having put down Exploration from the chief place
in the tale, and put up a wife and mother.

As for the verse--Gudrid's Wardlock chant is adapted from the Lay of Swipday and Merglad in
_Corpus Poeticum Boreale_, I, 92 _seq_., and Thorstan's Song of Helgi and Sigrun is a partial
version of that epic (_ibid_. 131).

GUDRID THE FAIR

I

Thorbeorn was old when this tale begins.  His face was lean, his beard was grey, he stooped
somewhat in the saddle.  But he had a fiery mind, a high spirit, and was so rich, or believed
so, that men said he could buy off Death more likely than any other man, seeing he would neither
fail of hardihood nor money.

By this time, old age apart, he had done very well for himself, having not only buried a wife,
but married another; having not only seen three sons out into the world and become a grandfather
twice over; but having had also, by his second wife, whose name was Hollweg, a daughter, and
an estate of Bathbrink which could be hers by and by, if he so pleased. This daughter was by
name Gudrid, and by all men's consent Gudrid the Fair.  Iceland has always been famous for
handsome women; but three are chiefly commemorated as "the Fair."  The first is Gudrun, who
was daughter of Oswif; but she was now old.  The second is Stangerd, daughter of Thorkel of
Tongue, and at this time the wife of Battle-Berse of Sowerby in the north-west parts.  This
Gudrid, Thorbeorn's daughter, is the third, and was, at the moment, of marriageable age, being
full fifteen years old.

She was a tall girl, well and beautifully made, with carriage so graceful and look so courteous
that men used to stop in the road and gaze after her as she walked.  Her hair was very nearly
black, and made a plait which she could easily sit upon.  She was no talker, but had the best
of manners, whereby it happened that those who talked with her were eloquent and believed that
she had been so.  She had a beautiful voice and notable skill in singing.  Men heard her songs,
and rushed out into the dark emulous of desperate work, and the sooner the better, to deserve
well of her.  Thorbeorn was very proud of her; but it had been her mother's work to have her
carefully trained.  If she had lived this tale might not have been written; but she did not.
She died a year before it begins, and left her old husband to a peck of troubles.

Thorbeorn was the last man to cope with trouble.  He was too proud, too vain, and too idle--too
proud to confide, too vain to accept, too idle to repair.  He had always kept a great table
and had a hall full of guests.  He had them still, though he had not the money to pay for them.
He borrowed on his property, and borrowed again to repay the first loans; he had ventures at
sea, which failed him.  He might have had help from his sons, but would not ask them.  When
Gudrid was fifteen years old these things vexed him sadly; but what vexed him more was that
young men came to Bathbrink to see if they could get speech with her; and that some of them
put forward friends with proposals to marry her.  So far he had refused to treat with any.
"It is not to be thought of," he generally said; sometimes, "It is very unsuitable"; and once,
"I am greatly offended."  Not that he did not fully intend to have her married--rather it was
that he had a rooted belief in the greatness of his family and in the girl's merits, and could
find none of the suitors at all equal to them.

He was one of those men who rather wish to believe in themselves than do it.  He was always
on the look-out for flaws upon his mettle.  He thought that Gudrid was unapproachable, and
when he found that she was not, fretted to make her so.  But Gudrid herself was not at all
unapproachable.  She liked the company of her equals in age, and saw no reason why young men
should not be anxious to talk to her, or why, if they hung about with the generality at the
lower end of the hall, they should not be invited to the fire.  With the girls in the bower
she talked freely of courtships, and of young men.  Thorbeorn would have been cut to the heart
to hear her.  It might have been better for him to have such a wound than the wound which actually
he did receive.

He was riding home late one autumn evening.  The weather was still mild and warm.  Nearing
home, he turned his horse on to the turf and walked him, with the reins hanging loose.  Presently
he was aware of two figures together under a clump of trees.  One of them he saw at once for
Gudrid.  The other was a man, he knew not whom.  Immediately hot water sprang into his eyes
and veiled their sight, but he saw enough to guess more.

The pair were taking leave of each other.  Their hands were clasped, their arms at length.
They were far apart, the man talking, Gudrid listening.  Then presently the strain on the arms
relaxed, their clasped hands fell; they were near together.  Gudrid, he saw, hung her head--and
then, suddenly, the man put his other arm about her neck, and drew her to him and kissed her
cheek.  At that she broke away and ran towards the house.  The man, looking after her for a
little, then vaulted the turf wall and ran down the hillside towards the river, making great
skips and jumps over the tussocks and boulders, as if he were as happy as a man could be. 
That was what Thorbeorn saw in the autumn dusk.

He went home in a dreadful state of mind, and could hardly bear to be served supper by his
desecrated daughter.  To think that those soft cheeks had been profaned by a strange youth,
that those grave young eyes had looked kindly upon another than himself, that that fair hand
had clasped another's in kindness--all this seemed to him horrible.  He thought her a hypocrite;
he thought himself insulted.  Yet even he had to admit that the kiss was sudden, and she evidently
surprised and (since she ran away at once) probably frightened.  He judged that she was a novice
at such work, but for all that was very much afraid that she took kindly to it.

He spent a great part of the night thinking it over, and before he went to sleep had made up
his mind.  Early in the morning he was out and about; before the day-meal he sent for Gudrid.
She came, singing to herself, fresh as a rose and as fair.  She asked his pleasure--and he
had not the heart to tell her his displeasure.  What he did say was this: "Put your gear together
as soon as you can.  I am taking you to Erne Pillar, where you will be put in fostership with
Orme."  Gudrid looked up startled, and saw in her father's eyes what she had not seen before.
Her own eyes fell, she coloured up, turned and went away, to do as she was told.

It may be said at once that she had done very little harm, and none knowingly.  The young man,
who was one of the several who came to the house, was the son of a neighbour, a man of repute.
Gudrid favoured him no more than any of the others, but it had so happened that he had been
there that afternoon, talking with the girls, and that Gudrid had walked with him as far as
the trees on his way home.  He had protracted the farewells, and had snatched a kiss; she had
been frightened and run away.  That might have happened to anybody--but she knew now that Arnkel
had had no business at the house when her father was not there. That could not be denied. 
She went soberly about her preparations, and the girls were full of pity.  They talked it over
and over, but there was nothing to be done.  Her bundles and bales were corded upon the sumpter's
back.  She embraced and kissed her housemates.  There were wet cheeks and trembling lips involved,
but they were not hers.  Then she was put up before her father, and away she went.

As for young Arnkel, he no more comes into the tale than he had stayed in Gudrid's mind.

II

Orme was a friend of Thorbeorn's, and a prosperous man.  He lived at Erne Pillar, which is
below Snaefellness, and near the sea.  There was a haven there and a town.  Moreover it was
a Christian settlement, with a church and a priest.  Most of the houses and land there belonged
to Orme, who lived in a good house of his own with his wife Halldis.  They had no children,
which was a grief to them.

Thorbeorn brought Gudrid to the house, and had a good reception from the goodman and his wife.
"Take her with you, good wife, into your bower," he said, "while I have a word with Orme. 
He will tell you all about it, or I will.  It is good for me to be sure that it makes no matter
which of us tells you."

Halldis said, it was easy to see that Gudrid was not making a short stay, and took her with
her through the house into the bower.  There, it was not long before she knew all that Thorbeorn
or Orme could have to say, and may be more still.

Meantime, Thorbeorn, after much unnecessary havers, said to Orme: "The matter is this, neighbour.
I ask you and the goodwife to take Gudrid here in fostership.  It will suit me in every way,
and I hope you will agree to it."

Orme said that it would suit him too very well.  "Nothing the mistress would like better than
to see herself reflected in a young pair of eyes."  Thorbeorn accepted that as a matter of
course; but presently he asked whether they saw much company at Erne Pillar.

Not such a deal of company, Orme said.  Now and again a ship came in, and there was a bustle,
with men coming and going, cheapening the goods.  "Nothing to you at Bathbrink, I daresay,"
he added.  "They tell me that you keep a great house up there--as is fitting you should."

"I have to remember what is expected of me," Thorbeorn said, and felt that he was no nearer
what he wanted to say than he had been.

"Gudrid is young," he said, beginning again.

"She's a beauty, it's evident," Orme said briskly, and instantly Thorbeorn felt himself bristling
down the backbone.

"She is sought after on all hands--but not by any who is to my liking. I hope that Halldis
will look after her well."

"She will look after her like one of her own," said Orme.  Thorbeorn had rather he had said
more than that.  He could not understand that Orme did not see what was at stake, and yet could
not enlighten him further.  The good wife then came springing in.

"She will be happy, and so shall we be," she said.  "I have a roomy heart, too long empty,
woe's me.  She will soon be singing about the house, and then we old folks will fall to it.
It will be like a nest of linnets.  She will scour our rusty pipes for us.  Excellent!"

Thorbeorn was put out that they seemed to think it pure pleasure to have his daughter on their
hands instead of great responsibility and a call to duty.

"Well," he said, "you have helped me with a serious trouble.  I leave her to you with confidence.
Where is she now?  For I must be going."

"She is with the girls in the wash-house," said Halldis.  "All chattering together like starlings
on a thatch.  All talking at once, and none listening.  Do you wish her fetched?"

"No," said Thorbeorn, waving his hand.  "She will do better where she is."  He felt the impossibility
of saying what he wished.  Then he took his way homewards, and the couple looked at each other.

"A love affair," Halldis said.

"It looks like it," said Orme.  "And there will be love affairs.  She's a paragon."

"That remains to be seen," Halldis said.  "She's a beauty at least. But a baby as yet.  Wait
till she's cut her teeth."

"I hope she won't cut them here," said Orme; but his wife said briskly, "Better here than there."
Halldis could see through Thorbeorn and pity his barren pride.

Gudrid was happy at Erne Pillar, and soon very much at home.  She had found her voice at once,
and now she began to find herself.  Her discoveries were made in the appreciative eyes of her
foster-parents, for that is the first place in which we get our notion of ourselves. The portrait
encouraged her.  She became interesting to herself.  Then there were the neighbours, often
in and out of the house, but always under the heedful eyes of the good wife.  Then there were
the ships. Last there were the priest, and his little church.  All the people at Erne Pillar
had been christened, as had Thorbeorn himself been; but there was a great difference when you
had a priest and a church.  The priest at Erne Pillar was a serious priest.  He said Mass every
day, and expected you, or some of you, to be there.  Now Thorbeorn, Christian though he were,
had never been to Mass in his life.  His Christianity consisted in turning his back on Frey.
Frey had been the chief God at Bathbrink and in all the country round.  Thorbeorn had been
Frey's priest at one time, but now would have nothing to say to him; and as for Gudrid, she
had never known anything herself about Frey or the other gods, but had been sprinkled as soon
as she could be carried down to Erne Pillar.  That, so far, had been the utmost of her Christianity.
But she had heard plenty of talk about the old gods; and now she was to hear more about them,
and something of the new gods too.

Orme and Halldis had both been heathens and knew a deal about Frey and Redbeard, as they called
Thor.  Orme was not interested in religion at all; but Halldis was.  Yesterday your sweet
Accusing eyes challenged me in the street.

XVII
THE ENIGMA
Eternally grieving and arraigning eyes, Why vex my heart? What is it I can do?
Can I call back the hounds of Time with sighs, Or find inviolate peace to bring you to, Pluck
frenzy from the amazed soul of man, Or curb the horses of raging poverty That trample you until--escape
who can,-- Or spill the honey from rich revelry And strip the silken days?--Alas! alas!
I am so dream-locked that I cannot know Why it is not much easier to pass To death than let love's
haughty cloister show A common hostel for such taverners.-- Ye
know, who are perhaps my ransomers.

XVIII
THE DOUBT
I am pure, because of great illuminations Of dreamy doctrine caught from poets of old, Because
of delicate imaginations, Because I am proud, or subtle, or merely cold.
Natheless my soul's bright passions interchange As the red flames in opal drowse and speak:
In beautiful twilight paths the elusive strange Phantoms of personality I seek.
If better than the last embraces I Love the lit riddles of the eyes, the faint Appeal of merely
courteous fingers,--why, Though 'tis a quest of souls, and I
acquaint My heart with spiritual vanities,-- Is there indeed no
bridge twixt me and these?

XIX
THE SEEKER
Curious and wistful through your soul I go.

With silver-tinkling feet I penetrate Sealed chambers, and a puissant
incense throw Upon the smouldering braziers, love and hate:
And chaunt the grievèd verses of a dirge For dying gods, remembering
flutes and shawms:
With perverse moods I trouble you, and urge The sense to beauty.

Give me some sweet alms, Some reverie, some pang of a damasked
sword, Some poignant moment yet unparalleled In my dream-broidered
chronicles, some chord Of mystery Love's music never knelled
Before;--but nought of the rough alchemy That disillusions all
felicity.

XX

THE HIDDEN REVERIE

The life of plants, rising through dim sweet states, Cloisters the
rich love-secret more and more, Gathers it jealously within the
gates Of the hushed heart; but, mightier than before, The mystery
prevails and overpowers Stem, leaf, and petal.

So the passion lies In this tranced flowery being which is ours
Like to a hidden wound; yet softly dyes With dolorous beauty all
the stuff of life, Each dream and vision and desire subduing With
muted pulses, that great counter-strife Of soul with its own rhythmic
pangs imbuing.

Deny it and disdain it. Lo! there beat Red stigmata in heart and hands and feet.

XXI
SOUL AND BODY
It may be all my pain is woven wrong, And this wild "I" is nothing
but a dream The body exhales, as roses at evensong Their passionate
odour.

Verily it may seem That this most fevered and fantastic wear Of
nerves and senses is myself indeed, The rest, illusion taken in
that snare.-- But still the fiery splendour and the need Can bite
like actual flame and hunger.

Ah!

If Sense, bewildered in the spiral towers Of Matter, dreamed this great Superbia I call the Soul,
not less the Dream hath powers; Not less these Twain, being one, are separate, Like lovers whose
love is tangled hard with hate.

XXII
SOUL AND BODY
II

Sometimes the Soul in pure hieratic rule Is throned (as on some high Abbatial chair Of
moon-pearl and rose-rubies beautiful) Within the body grown serene and fair:
Sometimes it weds her like a lifted rood; But she endures, and wills no anodyne, For then
she flowers within the mystic Wood, And hath her lot with gods--and seems divine:
Sometimes it is her lonely oubliet, Sometimes a marriage-chamber sweet with spice:
It is her triumph-car with flutes beset, The altar where she lies a sacrifice.-- Cold images! The truth
is not in these.
Both are alive, both quick with rhapsodies.

XXIII

THE JUSTIFICATION
Life I adore, and not Life's accidents.
A garlanded and dream-fast thurifer My Soul comes out from beauty's
purple tents That incense-troubled Love may grieve and stir, Be
ransomed from satiety's sad graves, And go to God up the bright
stair of Wonder.

Since passion makes immortal Time's tired slaves I am of those that delicately sunder
Corruptions of contentment from the breast As with rare steel.

Like music I unveil Last things, till, weary of earthen cups and rest, You seek Montsalvat and
the burning Grail.
Ah! blindly, blindly, wounded with the roses, I bear my spice where Ecstasy reposes.

XXIV

ASPIRATIONS
Light of great swords, banners all blazoned gold, Bright lists of danger where with trumpets
pass Riders like those for whom bride-bells are bold To beautiful desperate conflict, Michaelmas
Of golden heroes, how my sad soul saith Your praise! Nor does to you her love deny, Solemn
strange Cups that carry dreamy death To quench those fevers when they flame too high.
But now the Victories have broken wings; The spirit of Rapture from the day of deeds Is banished,
and must spend on sorcerous strings Her heart that perishes of
splendid needs.-- Saints, lovers, high crusaders, give me too Some
simple and impassioned thing to do.

XXV
THE ANAESTHETIC

Like a white moth caught heavily, heavily, In the honeyed heart of
some white drowsy flower, I lay behind the leaves of apathy, Where
not the reddest pang has any power.

Then, like one drowning, I rose and lapsed again On dim sweet tides of the great anodyne.
Why must they hale me back to drink the pain That seethes in
consciousness, an evil wine?

I love the closing trances, howsoever Their seals be broken: they are wise and kind.
If death can give such fumes of poppy, never Shall I revile him.

Oh! uncertain mind!
Hast thou an equal pleasure in the proud Flame-builded pillar, and
the pillar of cloud?

XXVI

DIVINATION

I weary of your hesitating will; This flicker of "should" and "should
not" crazes me.

Rest from these vain debates of good and ill:
Let me your secret swift diviner be.

In the memorial blue dusk of sense, Where, spirals of doves or wreaths of ravens, rise Auguries
sweet or dread, the blue dusk whence The cresseted houses of the stars surprise The heart
with their mysterious horoscopes, I know the issues ere great battles begin, The ashen values
of bright-burning hopes, The ultimate hours of sacrifice or sin.

Do I obey the Wisdom? If I list, I too, beloved, can play the casuist.

XXVII
SUB-CONSCIOUSNESS
Sometimes as Martha suddenly stood amazed By Mary's mystic eyes, and sometimes as That very
dreamer Mary might have gazed Upon the Daughter of Herodias, The conscious Soul that other Soul
discovers, The strange idolator who still regrets Golden Osiris, Tammuz lord of lovers,
Attis the sad white god of violets.
In jasper caves she lies behind her veils; And jars of spice, and gilded ears of corn, And
wine-red roses and rose-red wine-grails Feed her long trances while the far flutes mourn.
She lies and dreams daemonic passionate things:
Cherubim guard her gates with monstrous wings.

XXVIII
SATIETY
Ah! love me not with honey-sweet excesses, With passionate prodigalities of praise, With wreaths
of daisied words and quaint caresses, Adore me not in charming childish ways.
This pastoral is beautiful enough:
But never shall it antidote my drouth:
I want a reticent ironic Love With smiling eyes and faintly mocking mouth.
Sweetness is best when bitterly 'tis bought:
So in Love's deadly duel I would not be Victorious, and the peace I long have sought, Sure
knowledge of his great supremacy, Would buy with pangs, like that bright cuirassier, The
queen-at-arms that knew the Peliad's spear.

XXIX
THE CONFESSION
I
I am initiate,--long disciplined In delicate austerities of art:
The clear compulsions of the sovran mind Constrain the dreamy panics of my heart.
Plato and Dante, Petrarch, Lancelot, Revealed me very Love, flame-clad, august.
Also I strove to be as we are not, Loyal, and honourable, and even just.
My webs of life in reveries were dyed As veils in vats of purple: so there stole Serene and
sumptuous and mysterious pride Through the imperial vesture of my soul.-- And lo! like any
servile fool I crave The dark strange rapture of the stricken slave.

XXX
THE CONFESSION

II
I have a banner and a great duke's way, I have an High Adventure
of my own.

Yet would I rather squire a knightlier,--Nay!
Be the least harper by his red-hung throne.
I am not satisfied with any love Till I can say, "O stronger far
than I!"

Is it a shame to hide the aching of, A sacred mystery to justify?
Through all our spiritual discontents Thrills the strange leaven
of renunciation.-- Ah!

god unknown behind the Sacraments Unfailing of the earthly expiation, Lift up this
amethyst-encumbered Vine, Crush from her pain some ransom-cup of
Wine.

XXXI

COMRADES

Yet for the honourable felicity Of comradeship I can be chivalrous,
And through love's transmutations fierily Constant as the gemmed
paladin Sirius To that fair pact.

We go, gay challengers, Beneath dark rampires of forbidden thought, Thread life's dim gardens
masked like revellers Where dreams of roses red are dearly bought.
We shall ride haughtily as bright Crusaders, As hooded palmers fare with humbled hearts, And
we shall find, adoring blithe invaders, The City of Seven Towers, of Seven Arts.-- Then the Last
Quest, (lead you the dreadful way!) Among the unimagined Nebulae!

XXXII

THE SUM OF THINGS
TO ANOTHER WOMAN
Well, I am tired, who fared to divers ends, And you are not, who
kept the beaten path; But mystic Vintagers have been my friends,
Even Love and Death and Sin and Pride and Wrath.

Wounded am I, you are immaculate; But great Adventurers were my starry guides:
From God's Pavilion to the Flaming Gate Have I not ridden as an
immortal rides?

And your dry soul crumbles by dim degrees To final dust quite happily, it appears, While all
the sweetness of her nectaries Can only stand within my heart like tears.
O throbbing wounds, rich tears, and splendour spent,-- Ye are all
my spoil, and I am well content.

XXXIII

REACTION
Give me a chamber paved with emerald And hung with arras green as
evening skies, Broidered with halcyons, moons, and heavily thralled
White lilies, cold rare comfort for the eyes.

Of triumph built was radiant yesterday:
Like an imperial eagle to the sun My soul bare up her dreams the glorious way Through flagrant
ordeals august, and won To burning eyries, till beneath her wing Rankled the shaft. Her
Archer was abroad; And hooded with strange darkness, shuddering Down pain's dull spiral,
sank she on the sod.

Close round, green dusk of dews! No more we dare The blue inviolate
castles of the air.

XXXIV
THE IDEALIST

For such an one let lovers cry, Alas!

Since passion's leaguer shall break through in vain To that cold centre of bright adamas.-- Storm
through her being, rapturous spears of pain!

Ye shall not wound that queen of gracious guile, The soul that with immortal trance keeps
troth:

For Helen is in Egypt all the while, Learning great magic from the Wife of Thoth.

Throned white and high on red-rose porphyry, And coifed with golden
wings, she lifts her eyes O'er Nile's green lavers where most
sacredly The Pattern of the myriad Lotos lies, Unto those clear
horizons jasper-pale Her heavenly Brethren ride in silver mail.

XXXV
WOMAN AND VISION
Vainly the Vision of Life entreats those eyes Where stars of glamour
mock at revelations.

But singular fiery moments do surprise With dreadful or delicious divinations The whorls of our
blue Labyrinth: the sweet Blind sense of touch tells like an
undersong Marvellous matters.

What though snared feet, And wounded hands, and ravelled coils of wrong, Plead that the solemn
Vision might make whole Our imperfection?

--Fevered second-sight, Audacious wisdom of the blinded soul, Dim delicate auroras of delight
That thrill the Dark from startled finger-tips, Are ye less precious an Apocalypse?

XXXVI
ART AND WOMEN

The Triumph of Art compels few womenkind; And these are yoked like
slaves to Eros' car,-- No victors they!

Yet ours the Dream behind, Who are nearer to the gods than poets are.
For with the silver moons we wax and wane, And with the roses love most woundingly, And, wrought
from flower to fruit with dim rich pain, The Orchard of the Pomegranates are we.
For with Demeter still we seek the Spring, With Dionysos tread the sacred Vine, Our broken
bodies still imagining The mournful Mystery of the Bread and Wine.-- And Art, that fierce
confessor of the flowers, Desires the secret spice of those veiled hours.

XXXVII

DESTINY
The great religions of the Rose and Grape Have bound us in to their sad Paradise:
We dream in crucial symbols, nor escape The cypress-garden where the slain god lies.
Daughters of lamentation round the Cross Where Beauty suffers garlanded with thorn, Remembrancers
through all the Night of Loss, We bear the spikenard of the Easter
Morn.

The yearning Springs, the brooding Autumns seethe Like philtres in our veins. O dark Election,
Are then the sacrificial doors we wreathe With lilies fiery gates
of Resurrexion?

And does the passion of our spices feed Love's bright Arabian miracle
indeed?

XXXVIII
CONFLICT
Why should a woman find her dream of love Irised by the strange ecstasy of Art?
Is not Eros a terrible lord enough That she must bear both Hunters of the heart, The Golden
Archer and the Scarlet too?

Then bitter anomalies annul her choir Of puissant and subtle instincts, rended through By
gorgeous dualisms of vain-desire.
For Love outrages Art's clear disciplines, And Art lures Love to guilt of cryptic treason:
The spirit of imagination pines, Captive in webs of exquisite unreason.
Alas for this translated soul of hers, The rose's, that must be the
garlander's!

XXXIX
PREDECESSORS
Faëry of Sheba, idol moulded in Onyx milk-white, moon-mailed and
casqued with gems; Ye gold-swathed queens of Egypt, Isis' kin, With
bright god-hawks and snakes for diadems; Serene masque-music of
Greek girls that bear The sacred Veil to that Athenian feast;
Hypatia, casting from thine ivory chair The gods' last challenge
to the godless priest; Fantastic fine Provençals wistfully Hearkening
Love, the mournful lute player; Diamond ladies of that Italy When
Art and Wisdom Passion's angels were-- Ye give this grail (touch
with no mad misprision!)

Of Beauty's rose-red miracled tradition.

XL
TRANSITION
But these recoil in riddles and reserves.-- The dream's untuned. Ah! vanished chords thereof!
Ah! keen divisions of the jangled nerves That strung so long the
gracious lutes of love!

-- Hurry to sell old magian Lamps for new, Though beauty's moonlike domes dissolve and pass:
If all things change, ye would be changing too, Crazed hearts that know not your desire,
alas!
Still, through these wintry treasons that forswear The lovely bitter
bondage of our god, Rare perennations of the soul prepare-- And
Music yet shall seal the period With some new star,--with sad pure
hands unveil For ransomed eyes again the gilded Grail.

XLI
THE VIRTUE OF PRIDE
My troubled bosom shall be cinct with pride, Girdled with red asterias. Is it sin If I have
cast lover and friend aside, Scorning them as myself who cannot win The strengths of beauty,
the heavenly altitudes?-- O sad and sacred Spirit of Disdain, What penances upon thine ivory
roods Within the burning Castles of thy pain!-- Thy mystic will no motion ever knew Outwith
the splendid danger of extremes; Thy sorrowful refusals pass thee through The great concentrics
of star-builded dreams, Unto the crypt of absolute ecstasy, To God or Nothing--where thine
heart would be.

XLII
SPELL-BOUND
I have been frozen. Once I was not cold.

But I have strayed within some glittering Night Of Lapland miracle, have leagued of old With
glaives and banners of wild Polar light.
Yet if I could dissolve in tears this core Of ice, my heart, undo these crystal spells, We should be
sisters of incense evermore Like the crowned Lover of the Canticles.
Through the great honeycomb of my soul should steep The secrets of the lilies, and her fire
Be ambergris, her agate flagons keep The sorcelled hydromel which brings Desire To that
mysterious Dark where still prevails The dream of roses and of
nightingales.

XLIII
THE NIGHT OBSCURE OF THE SOUL

When the Soul travails in her Night Obscure, The nadir of her
desperate defeat, What heavenly dream shall help her to endure,
What flaming Wisdom be her Paraclete?

No curious Metaphysic can withhold The heart from that mandragora
she craves:-- Unreasonable, old as Earth is old, The blind ecstatic
miracle that saves.

Far off the pagan trumpeters of Pride Call to the blood.--Love moans.--Some fiery fashion Of
rapture like the anguish of the bride Leaps from the dark perfection
of the Passion, Crying: "O beautiful God, still torture me, For if
thou slay me, I will trust in Thee."

XLIV
THE CONQUEST OF IMMORTALITY
Ah! not in earthy dull durations I Mine heirdom of Eternity implore.

Give one star-drunken moment ere I die, Then doom me dreadless to
the implacable Door.

That mystical Assumption shall disown Time's haughtiest lieges. Grey mortality Will disenchant
the jewel-breded throne Of Cassiopeia when more burningly My deed exults with angels. I will
borrow From continuity no larva-lease:

Through sworded crises and great compts of sorrow I seek the splendour that shall never cease
Though Death coin from my soul through endless years Dim drachmas
of his infinite arrears.

XLV

WOMEN OF TANAGRA
Have these forgotten they are toys of Death That in his sad aphelions
of desire They still regret the joy that perisheth, And Spring's
great reveries that exceed and tire,-- Faintly accusing Love's
unmercied yokes With almost wanton grace, the craft and art Of
precious frailty that with subtle strokes Of sweetness finds the
core of Passion's heart?

They carry fans and mirrors, or make fast The mournful flute-like cadence of a veil.
Slight fans that winnowed souls, mirrors that glassed The burning brooding wings which never
fail!
Still in such lovely vanities to-day The gods their secret wisdom hide away.

XLVI

THE INVENTORY

TO HER FRIEND

I love all sumptuous things and delicate, Ethereal matters richly paradised In Art's proud
certitudes. I love the great Greek vases, carven ivory, subtilised Arras of roses, Magians dyed on
glass, Graven chalcedony and sardonyx, Nocturnes that through the
nerves like fever pass, Arthurian kings, Love on the crucifix, All
sweet mysterious verse, the Byzantine Gold chambers of Crivelli,
marble that flowers In shy adoring angels, patterned vine And lotos,
and emblazoned Books of Hours,-- _And you, whose smiling eyes to
ironies Reduce both me and mine idolatries_.

XLVII

COMFORT

I
I sang the Dolorous Stroke of Disillusion, Yet never have I broken
faith with Joy:
Flame-broidered trance and starless cold confusion Of slain and
flying dreams shall not destroy The radiant oath to that bright
Suzerain Whose lightning-lovely succour ambushed lies Even in the
most impossible strait of pain.

Mystical paradox, divine surprise Of rapture!

By intensities alone Their spirits enter in to exultation For whom
the burning winds of their sad zone Bear down the Dove of the
Imagination, Who suffer superbly, _in scarlet violetted, As the
Sacred Kings of the Lillie_ mourned their dead.*
* See Favine's "Book of Chivalry."

XLVIII
COMFORT
II
And that is marvellous comfort;--and yet poor To what mere woman-mystery can give, The strange
simplicity that will endure The pangs of death, most resolute to live.
This God of riddles that shaped a thing so frail For his worst torment hid mysterious powers
Within her breast who can like lilies prevail Through rains of doom that conquer brassy
towers.
Her heart lies broken; when some trivial chord Of sweetness chimes reveille through the
sense,-- A rose, a song, a smile, a courtly word.
She wakes, and sighs, and softly passes thence Back to the masquers,
though her soul's veiled Pyx Enclose the solemn fruits of the
Crucifix.

XLIX
THE CHANGE
I spun my soul about with soft cocoons Of pleasure golden-pale. For me, for me Were precious
things put forth by crescent moons, Of pearl and milky jade and ivory.
Grave players on ethereal harpsichords, My senses wrought a music exquisite As patterned roses,
all my life's accords Were richer, ghostlier than peacocks white.
So in my paradise reserved and fair I grew as dreamlike as the
Elysian dead; Until a passing Wizard smote me there, And suddenly
my soul inherited Some gorgeous terrible dukedom of desire Like
those in bright Andromeda's realms of fire.

L

AT THE END

He would break up his homestead, sell his estates,
pay his debts, and go abroad.  That would be at once just and of good appearance in the world.

But he would not go east where he would find a life ready made for him, with the same state
to maintain, and be no better off than he had been at home.  It was for Greenland he intended,
a new country with but few settlers in it yet.  An old friend of his, one Eric Red, had gone
out there for good reasons some years ago, and had often sent him messages begging him to join
his colony.  Now he would do it.  The thought warmed him.

He set the business afoot at once, and sold the whole of his estate for a good price.  When
he had paid his creditors, which he did very particularly and with a great air, he had a good
sum over and above the cost of his ship.  His spirits rose, his taste for splendid hospitality
revived.  He resolved to give a great feast to all his friends and acquaintances, such a feast
as should make men say that nobody had ever confronted misfortune more gallantly than Thorbeorn
of Bathbrink.

It was a noble feast, lasting three days and nights; the greatest there had been made within
the memory of men.  Everybody came, for enmities were all forgotten.  Orme was there from Erne
Pillar, and Halldis was with him.  Good Halldis embraced Gudrid, kissed her on both cheeks,
and held her closely, very ready to revive memories.  "And what have you to say to it?  And
how will you face the hardships of the strange land?" Gudrid was very guarded in her answers.
"I shall like to see Greenland," she said; "we used to talk about it at Erne Pillar."  It was
true, Einar had told them of it, and of his friend Biorn who had found his father out there
after seven weeks at sea.

"And you go out there without a husband?" said Halldis, with sympathy ready and waiting in
her kindly eyes.

Gudrid said, "Why not?  It is not I who have the wedding of myself." She would not meet Halldis
half-way, nor any part of the way.  Halldis felt the chill.

But Gudrid and her maidens did the last hospitalities of Bathbrink sweetly and diligently.
They say that the qualities of the mistress are reflected in the maids.  Gudrid was owned a
beauty on all hands, but it was agreed that her manners enhanced her good looks, as a fair
setting will show off a jewel.  To see her at her service, you would have thought her without
a care in the world.  She could laugh and talk with one and all, she could be grave with the
grave and gentle with those who mourned.  But she would not let any know that she mourned herself.
Any hint towards Einar turned her to smooth stone.  She had that kind of pride from her father,
the kind that is tender of itself.

As for Thorbeorn, he was splendid, and the more splendid he was the more he felt himself to
be so.  On the last night of his feast, when the hall was full, the horns nearly empty, and
the torchlight getting low, he thumped the high table with the hilt of his dagger, and stood
up in a dead silence.

"Neighbours," he said, "it is time I should bid you farewell.  In this good land, where my
fathers have lived before me, I too have lived my life out, and kept my customs, and good faith
with all men; and have made many friends, and no enemies that I know of.  As I have served
mankind, so has mankind served me.  To you, friends and guests, I say that we have proved each
other and seen good days.  But now, so it is that I at least must see some doubtful days. 
I have been pinched and straitened in many ways.  I have had to consider whether I should stay
on here in a mean way of life or move out into freer quarters.  Old as I am, I choose to go
abroad; nor do I think you will blame me if I can go away honourably, leaving no man the worse
for my departure.  Now my good friend Eric Red has asked me to share quarters with him in Greenland,
where he has a settlement and keeps a great train--and thither I intend to go.  And I shall
go this very summer, if all turn out as I expect, and take, as I hope, your friendship with
me.  In any case let this feast stand to you as a token of my goodwill to every man here."

He stood for a moment looking forth upon the crowded tables, and at the women clustered about
the doors.  He was much moved by the force and plainness of his own words, and for a while
every one kept silence, thinking that he had more to say.  But he had not, and presently sat
down in his seat.  That was the signal for uproar.  The men stood on the benches and shouted
"Hail" to him; they helped the women up, too, who waved their hands or scarves, or whatever
came handy.  Gudrid saw Orme's hand held out to her, and took it, standing with the rest, with
Orme's arm round her.  In the excitement of everybody the emotions get loose.  Orme held Gudrid
closely to him and whispered in her ear, "If he would let you stay with us, Gudrid, how happy
we should be!"  She turned him her pale face, smiling into his; but Fate held her fast, and
she did not even answer him.  "Shall I have at him again, for Einar's sake?" said the good
Orme, eager to procure happiness for somebody.  At that she shook her head.  "He would not
have it.  I am sure of that." So was Orme in his sober mind.

Meantime the neighbours were thronging about Thorbeorn, pledging him in horns of mead and ale.
Many of them offered him stock or provision for the voyage; many cried that they would go with
him to the new settlement.  They would never thole a new master, they said, and fully believed
it.  Some thirty souls did actually go on the voyage.  This was the greatest day of Thorbeorn's
life so far.

VII

Thorbeorn's ship lay ready for him in Rawnhaven; but there was much to do, what with hay and
corn harvest, to get in, before he could leave. He sailed, then, fully late in the year--himself
and his household, thirty or more of his friends beside, his house-pillars and all the stock
he had left beside.  He was burning to be off, the old adventurer that he was, but Gudrid was
not of his way of feeling about it.  The Icelanders were a race of stoics.  What was to be
held them spellbound. Far from hindering adventure, it promoted it; for you never knew but
what Fate intended you to succeed.  But Gudrid had seen how she might have been happy, and
could not understand how otherwise she could be. The last night at home, so she fondly called
Iceland, was spent with Orme and Halldis, to whose kindness she thawed at last.  She cried
upon Halldis's broad bosom, and revealed herself.  "You see how it is with me now," she said.
"If I never meet him again I shall never love another man.  And I see no way of meeting him--and
so I must be wretched."  Then she fairly wailed: "I might have been so happy--I might have
been!" till it was pity to hear her.

Presently she took out her token and showed it to Halldis.  "That is all I have of Einar's,"
she said.  Halldis said that she had the girdle he had given her.  "Yes," she said, "but this
has his teeth-marks in it."  Then she sat up on Halldis's lap and looked shyly at her, saying,
"I am going to ask you something."

"Ask, my child."

"If it should happen ever that I come home again, and want to see Einar, will you give him
this from me?  He will know then what to do."

Halldis promised.  "He is mostly here every year," she said.  "But there's no saying how it
may find him."

"It will find him waiting for me," Gudrid said.  "He promised me that."

"Oh, my dear, my dear," cried Halldis, "to be sure he did!  What else could he say or feel
at such a time?"  But Gudrid held to her opinion, and to her token too.  She said that she
should always wear it; and Halldis had not the heart to exclaim.

They sailed with a fair wind, having waited for it, and were soon out of sight of land; but
it did not hold.  Bad weather overtook them, contrary winds, driving rain, fog--that overhanging
curse of Greenland. They ran far out of their course and had to beat back again; cattle died,
provision ran short; to crown all a sickness broke out among the company, whereof near half
died.  Thorbeorn kept hale and hearty throughout; and Gudrid took no harm.  The wet, the clinging
cold, the wild weather did not prevent her attending the sick, or doing the work which they
should have done, had they been able.  She had no time to be happy or unhappy, and was never
afraid of anything.

It was hard upon the winter; the days were short, the nights bitter cold.  The fog, thick and
white like a fleece, seemed incapable of lifting.  The wind came in short spells, the sea was
lumpy.  But one day as they were labouring and rolling, the ship straining and cordage creaking,
Thorbeorn lifted his head, and bore hard upon the helm. "Breakers!" he shouted, and the crew
sprang to the rail.  A dark form seemed to lift out of the fog, like a core of blackness, and
clouds of sea-birds wheeled overhead with harsh clamour.  They were come unawares to Greenland
the White, and within an ace of breaking up against her cliffs.

None on board knew what headland this might be; but Thorbeorn knew it was not Ericsfrith, which
he had intended to make.  They rounded it, however, without mishap, and had a fair wind when
they were beyond it. At last they could see a shore with a rough breakwater of stones; and
presently upon that shore some men standing together.  They cast anchor and let down their
sails, and before all was shipshape a boat came rowing out to them, with a man in the stern
in a blue cloak.  The boat came alongside, and they were hailed.  "Who and whence are you?"

Thorbeorn told his name and port of origin.  "I hoped to make Ericsfrith," he said.

"You have made a poor business of it," said the master of the boat. "This is Heriolfsness,
a good ten hours' sailing from the frith; and I am Heriolf at your service."

Gudrid's heart leapt.  This was the father of Biorn, of whom Einar had told her in the days
of her happiness.  That seemed for a moment to bring Einar within touching distance.

Meantime Heriolf came on board and greeted Thorbeorn fairly.  He was a hale old man, with white
hair and beard, and twinkling blue eyes.  "You will do well," he said, "to stay with me through
the winter.  This is an unchancy country in winter time, what with fog and scurvy and one thing
and another.  In Iceland you do better, because you have the wind--but here the fog smothers
everything.  If my son Biorn were at home he could tell you of a new country, my word!  But
he's away, and no telling when he will be here again.  Now, if you are willing, we will be
going.  My people will see to the housing of yours, and the stock shall be looked after as
if it was my own.  But you and your girl here will be happy to be by a hearth again."

So it was done.  They found Heriolf a good host, his house well built and well stored.  He
had a comely wife, too, who took kindly to Gudrid. "That's a paragon of a girl you have there,"
Heriolf said.  "If my son were at home I don't know how it would turn out."

"She's not for every one," said Thorbeorn, on his dignity at once.

"But my son Biorn is some one, let me tell you," said Heriolf.  "He is a traveller who has
seen more of the world than any man living, I dare say.  And here in Greenland, you must know,
a woman is a precious piece of goods.  There was a woman brought in here last summer with a
sick man who died before he had been a week in bed.  Before he was buried there were six men
fighting who should be her next.  And two of them were killed outright; but none of them got her."

"Would she have none of them?" Thorbeorn asked, though he was not at all interested.

"She had no opportunity," said Heriolf.  "For another man came and took her away before they
had done fighting."

Thorbeorn held his head stiffly.  "But my daughter is greatly descended," he said.  "And Eric
Red is of my friends."

"All that may be," said Heriolf, "but your daughter is a woman, and Eric Red himself no more
than a man.  In this country you have to deal with people as God made them.  But there is a
wise woman in the town, and maybe she will tell us what is written in the book of life."

"My daughter is a Christian," said Thorbeorn, but old Heriolf's mouth twitched.

"I dare swear she will be wanting to know what the book of life says, for all that.  Let me
tell you that a marriage is not over when the priest has said his say.  No, nor yet begun, maybe."

Nobody could have been more easy to quarrel with than Heriolf upon the subject of his son,
except Thorbeorn upon that of his daughter; yet there was no quarrel.  It may be that Thorbeorn
was too happy to stretch his thin legs towards a driftwood fire again, or again, that he recognised
the sweet kernel of his host under the cruddled husk. However it was, he let the talk of wise
women and the Book of Fate float over his head as the spume of the sea passes over the tangle
far below.  The spume creams and surges, then disparts; but the sea-tangle sways to the deep
currents of the tide undisturbed.  All well and good--but there was a Wise Woman.

VIII

Thorberg was the Wise Woman's name.  She was the last alive of a family of nine, all women
and all wise in the art of reading the days to come. It was supposed that she had come from
Iceland, but nobody remembered to have brought her, nor knew of her origin.  In these days
she lived by herself in a hut of the Settlement at the Ness, and crouched over a peat fire
all the winter, singing songs to herself which nobody could understand.  In the summer she
was often seen about among the pastures below the hills, but always by herself.  When she was
asked she might go out and show herself at men's houses where there was a feast going on; if
she was treated according to her fancy she might foretell the fortune of the householder or
of some guest of his, or the upshot of the coming harvest, whether of the sea or of the land.
But everything must be exactly as she pleased.  There was no telling what she would do or say.

Heriolf was the greatest man at the Ness, and kept the best table.  He seldom lacked of guests
during the dark months.  He was a most hospitable man--loving, as he said, everything on two
legs.  He had never accepted the new religion, and stood well with Thorberg, but had such respect
for her that he would never ask her to come to a feast unless the entertainment were what he
thought worthy of her.  This year, with Thorbeorn and Gudrid in the house, he felt that she
ought to be asked up, so sent a man out to invite her, naming the day when the feast would
be ready.  Thorberg returned word that she would come, but made no promises of what she would say.

Immediately, Heriolf set about his preparations and, immediately, there was trouble with Thorbeorn.
He did not like it at all.  He took it ill that there should be such a fuss.  Thorberg, it
seemed, must have a high seat; she must be escorted to the feast; she must have her particular
food, dressed just so; she must be treated with great respect, let alone, never crossed, never
importuned.  And he a Christian!  "Heathen customs!" he said.  "Friend, you shall have me excused.
These things smell of brimstone.  I could not be present by any means, and don't desire that
Gudrid should be involved."

But Heriolf scouted him.  "Hey," he said, "please yourself!  But as for Gudrid, let her alone.
Why should she not hear what the world has to say to her?  What harm can come to a good girl?
All kinds make this world."

Gudrid, whose hair he pulled, as he spoke, in a very friendly way, seeing his eyes twinkling
and his lips twitching, coloured, but said that she should like to be at the feast.  It was
true, but apart from the truth, she would not hurt Heriolf's feelings.

"Of course you would like it," said Heriolf, greatly pleased.  "I never knew a handsome girl
yet who did not like to be told about it. Thorberg thinks a deal of handsome persons.  You
will find that she has a wonder-deal to tell about you.  And perhaps we shall learn what my
son Biorn means to do with himself when he comes home here, and finds a flower in the garth."
Gudrid coloured more than ever at this; but she liked it.  Thorbeorn waved his hand before
him as though to brush gossamer from his path, and stalked away with his chin in the air, and
his beard jutting out like a willow in the wind.  He kept his word, though; and took himself
to bed when the feast began.

These were the preparations made for Thorberg's visit.  A high seat was set for her at the
right hand of Heriolf's own, and upon it a cushion worked with runes and dragons in knots,
stuffed with hen's feathers. That had to be wherever she went.  Then she must sit in the chief
place at the table, beside the giver of the feast, and her food must be seen to.  First she
must have a mess of oats seethed in kids' milk; then, for her meat, a dish made of the hearts
of animals.  Gizzards, too, of birds, and their livers, must be in it.  There were to be set
for her a brass spoon, and an ivory-hilted knife with rings of bronze upon the handle.  She
had a great horn for a beaker, adorned with silver; and then her drink was to be hot mead,
with spices and apples floating in it.  Heriolf saw to everything.

When all was ready, and the guests expected, a man was sent out to her house to bring Thorberg
to the feast; and when all the guests were gathered, but by no means before, in she came. 
She was a tall fair woman, blue-eyed, broad-shouldered and of large presence.  She had a wild,
rich, comely face.  She was dressed in a black robe which gleamed and reflected light.  It
clung to her as if she had been dipped in water.  Silver clasps held it under the bosom, and
from neck to foot it was set with large blue stones.  Round her neck she had a string of beads,
of red amber, as large as seagulls' eggs.  She walked with a staff, knotted with amber; on
her head was a hood of black lambskin, lined with white.  There was a girdle round her loins
made of dried puff-balls strung together, and a fishskin pouch hung from that, in which were
the charms she used in her prophesying.  Her shoes were calfskin with the hair outside, and
were bound to her ankles with broad leather thongs.  She had gloves on when she came in--catskin
gloves with the hair turned inwards.  So dressed, holding herself high and queenly, she stood
in the doorway, and said, "Hail to this house," in a deep voice, like a bell.  Then she took
off her hood and gloves and gave them to him who attended upon her, while Heriolf came up to
her, took her hands and kissed them, saying, "Sibyl, you are welcome."

After Heriolf all the company came crowding about her and saluted her as if she were a princess.
To some she was gracious, at some she stared as if she could see through them to the wall beyond,
at some she muttered with her lips and looked about, as if she were uneasy till they were gone.
All the women curtseyed and kissed her hand, and presently Heriolf brought Gudrid to her. 
Gudrid did not kiss her hand, but curtseyed and spoke her fairly.  Thorberg frowned, not unkindly.

"And who art thou, my child?"

Gudrid said, "I am a stranger, not long come to Greenland.  I am Thorbeorn's daughter, of Bathbrink
in Iceland."

"You have a good face, and a fair one," said Thorberg, "and yet you will not kiss my hands."
Gudrid coloured and looked down.  "Perhaps the day will come when you will kiss them," Thorberg
said.  "It would be no shame to you to do it."

Gudrid then said, "I will do it now if you will let me."  But Thorberg patted her cheek and
said, "By and by."  The people thought that Gudrid had shown good manners by offering and that
Thorberg was pleased with her.

They spread the table for the feast, and Gudrid served the guests with the other girls of the
house.  Thorberg sat by Heriolf, and said very little, which was all to the good, since it
made men treasure what she did say, and find more in it than may have been there.  Then, when
the tables had been cleared, Heriolf stood up and asked her if she had been well-treated. 
Thorberg said, "You have given me your best, Franklin. No one can look for more."

"Would it please you, then, to reveal certain things to the company?"

She stared before her.  "What do you desire to know?"

"Why," said Heriolf, "we should like to know how it stands with this house, and with those
who are in it, and those who are of it; and how long these plagues of sickness and death are
to oppress us; and other things which you may read out of the dark, and be moved to tell us."

She thought for a while, looking down the hall above the heads of those who stood to hear her.
Just below the dais Gudrid was standing with the house-girls.

After a time Thorberg said, "Set me the spell-seat," and remained abstracted while it was being
done.

Heriolf set up the spell-seat, and then Thorberg opened her pouch of magic and took out certain
small flat stones covered with writing, and some tufts of feathers, a lump of brown amber,
a ring of jet, and some teeth of a great sea-beast.  All these she laid round the seat in a
circle, except the ring of jet, which she kept in her hand.  Then she sat upon the spell-seat,
and said to Heriolf, "Bring me the woman who is to sing the Ward-locks."  Those were the charms
which had to be sung, not so much to invoke the spirits with whom she was familiar as to keep
away those who were adverse.

Every man looked at his neighbour; the women whispered together, but all shook their heads.
In and out among his guests Heriolf ran in a great taking.  "Heard any one the like of this,
that I should think of everything, and fail for one?"  But nobody knew the songs.  In his naked
bed behind the wall lay old Thorbeorn with the blanket up to his nose, and jerked his thin
legs, losing not one tittle of all this.

Presently, with Heriolf hot and flustered and at his wits' end, with women scouring the kitchen
and the bower to find some one not counted yet, Gudrid turned round about to face the Wise
Woman.  She was pale, but her eyes were bright.  "Whisht now," Thorberg cried in her deep tones;
"heed the fair girl."  The hush then was dreadful, but Gudrid said what was in her.  "I am
not a sorceress, and know nothing of magic, but Halldis my foster-mother taught me some songs
which she said were Ward-locks and charms."  Heriolf clapped his hands, and Thorberg smiled
and said, "I believed thee wise when I saw thee first.  And now perhaps it is for me to kiss
thy hands, or even for the most of this company, for thou art timely as well as wise."

But Gudrid looked troubled.  She did not at all wish to sing.  "The songs," she said, "were
sung idly at home while we sat at needlework. They did not mean anything to me.  I thought
no harm of them."

"Nor is there harm, my child," said Thorberg.

Gudrid said, "But this is a rite, and the song is part of it.  I think I ought not to sing,
because I am a Christian."

Thorberg was still smiling, but her eyes glittered.  "It may be that thou canst serve the company
here, and do no harm to thyself.  Who should think the worse of thee?  Certainly not I.  But
this is for our host to see about.  It is he who made me sit here."

Now it was Heriolf's turn, and he pressed Gudrid hard.  The girls too, and all the women who
were there, were closely about her, asking with eyes and voices.  Gudrid could not resist them,
though she knew Thorbeorn would be angry, and believed herself that she ought not to have anything
to do in magic.  But she promised.  The women made a circle about her; she thought for a little
while, then lifted her head, and sang loud and clear--

  "To Vala sang Vrind,
  The first charm I wind--
  What evil thou meetest
  Let drop it behind.
  Thyself for guide,
  The ghost is defied--
  Look forth
  To what thou shalt find.

  Next charm I call--
  If despair thee befall
  As thou goest thy journey,
  May the Good Folk wall
  With wings, with wings
  Thy wayfarings--
  Look forth,
  Fear not at all.

  This third charm I make--
  If the dark thee take
  On the road thou goest
  For this man's sake,
  May the hags of night
  Do thee no spite.
  Look forth,
  My heart is awake.

  The fourth charm I tell
  Is the loosing spell--
  Though they bind thee in fetters
  And cast thee in cell,
  No walls shall clip thee,
  The irons shall slip thee--
  Look forth,
  All shall go well."

The song was to a strange wild air, very beautiful, known to many, of whom many had tears in
their eyes to hear it again, and sung so well. Thorberg sat with her eyes closed, and nodded
her head to the beats of it.  It made a great effect, and Gudrid was praised by everybody.
When it was over, Thorberg, being squarely on the spell-seat, said to her: "I thank you for
the song, and for the good heart which was in it.  I tell you that many beings besides those
whom you see have been drawn in by the sound of your voice, beings who without it would have
passed over our heads and paid no heed to us and our concerns.  They have been here, they are
here now all about us, and by their means I see many things clearly.  And first, you, Heriolf,
need not fear the death nor the sickness which are rife at this time.  They will pass with
the winter, and return again with another winter; and for a long time the winter will be hard
upon you men in Greenland."

So much she said to Heriolf, but she had not ended her soothsay.  Her eyes returned to Gudrid,
who stood just below her.

"As for you, my daughter," she said, "I can read what is in store for you as if it was written
in a book.  You will have three husbands here in Greenland, and shall not go far to get them.
All will be honourable men.  One will be a famous man, and one an ugly man; but he will be
kind.  With all of them you will go great journeys over sea, but they will not all last long.
One journey you will go, to a country far from here, which will be of the greatest length,
and have hardships in it, and wonders, and a good gift for you.  But all your ways lead to
Iceland, and thither you will return.  Out of you will come a great race of men, and you shall
end your life-days in the way that pleases you best."  Then her eyes grew less blank, and seemed
able to see more clearly.  She held out her hand towards Gudrid, who stood rooted, staring
up with great eyes.  "Farewell, daughter, and I give you hail," she said.  Gudrid ran up the
steps and kissed her hand.

IX

Gudrid's fortune was envied by the girls of the house, who expressed themselves freely about
it.  "With your looks," they said, "it was to be expected she would take notice of you.  But
to see so much, and to tell you all!"  The poor girl herself, however, took it very hard, and
saw herself punished for impiety.  She felt as if she was branded for ever--the girl who was
to kill two men, and perhaps a third.  In her mind's eye she could see that doomed first husband
of hers, the shadow coldly upon him, herself looking sorrowfully at him, seeing him in the
shadow but not able to speak of it.  Her heart gave a leap of gratitude that Einar had been
sent away by her father.  It might have been he in the shadow.  But would he be the second?
Ah, no, she vowed he should not.  Or would he be the third?  Not if the third was to be an
ugly man.  Then there was the promise of the end: "Your ways tend to Iceland . . . thither
you will return . . . you shall end your life-days in the way that pleases you best."  Could
that mean that Einar----?  But after three honourable men had received death at her hand! 
She shuddered and hugged herself against the cold.  Not even the promise of Einar seemed fortification
enough for that.  Nevertheless, there was comfort in the last days.  She told her bedfellow
stoutly that she did not believe a word of it, but the girl merely stared at her.  Then she
said: "I know who your first husband will be if he can persuade Thorbeorn.  It is Skeggi of
Whitewaterstrand."  After that Gudrid had to be told all about it.

She told her father too--but not so stoutly--that she did not believe it; but in her heart
she felt that it must be true.  As for Thorbeorn, who had heard it all through the wall, whatever
he may have thought, he was very indignant, and angry with her too.  "Put such mummery out
of your head.  We are not Christians for nothing, I should hope.  A scandalous hag with her
bell-wether voice and airs of a great lady! What has she to do with good women, well brought
up?  A woman's duty is to leave match-making to her parents, and the future to God and His
Angels.  Who can foretell his end?  Can the priest?  Can the bishop? No.  And who would wish
to know it?  Ask yourself.  I am vexed that we should have fallen upon a heathen house, and
much more that you should have lent yourself to its wicked customs."

Gudrid excused herself.  "I couldn't help myself.  They are kind people.  It would have been
ungracious.  And I did know the songs.  How could I have said I did not?"

"And who taught you such songs?"

"Halldis sang them," she said; "I learnt them of her."

He had to allow for much that she urged.  "Well, think no more of it," he bade her.

"No, I must not," she said.

"When the time comes, when we are settled by Eric Red, I shall find a good husband for you,
beyond a doubt."

"Yes," said Gudrid.

"Then we shall have the laugh of these mystery-mongers."

"Yes."

"As for me, I never heard such nonsense in my days."

"No," said Gudrid, looking about for a way of escape.  She could neither put it out of her
head, nor believe it nonsense.  Fate hung heavy on her like a pall of smoke.

She had Skeggi of Whitewaterstrand pointed out to her by her room-mate, and recognised him
as a young man she had often seen at the house.  Now immediately she looked upon him with tenderness,
and received his advances to acquaintance with such kindness that he conceived high hopes and
went about with his chest swelling with pride.  But all the time he was talking to her, or
at her, rather, with the other girls, her heart was calling to him, "Do not marry me, do not,
do not----" which he, unfortunately, interpreted in the opposite sense.

Oddly enough, though every one in the Settlement had heard the soothsay, and nobody doubted
it, she was the only person concerned who took it closely to heart.  Young Skeggi was earnest
to have her to wife, and asked Heriolf to put his case forward to Thorbeorn. Thorbeorn, however,
would have nothing to say to him.  Skeggi disappeared, and Gudrid had a moment's ease.

The first things foretold by Thorberg came about with the quickening of the year.  With the
first blowing of the warm wet wind of the west, the fogs began to roll away off the land and
pile themselves upon the flanks of the mountains.  Then, when the earth had warmth enough in
her body to thaw the iron mail about her ribs, the sickness in the Settlement abated.  Men
felt the light, and saw whence it came.  The sun showed himself, first like a silver coin,
then with sensible heat. The cattle were put out to pasture, the sheep could move and nibble
about the foothills.  Hens began to lay, cows to give milk, sheep to drop lambs.  Thorbeorn
made ready to sail to Ericsfrith, and Gudrid was able to forget that she was marked with a curse.

So the day for sailing came, a bright spring day with a soft wind, which crisped the waters
of the bay and heaped froth upon the stones. At parting, old Heriolf twinkled his kind and
frosty eyes upon Gudrid. "Farewell, my child," he said; "you are a notable woman who will do
great things."  She smiled, but sadly.  "It seems I am to bring unhappiness to many," she said.
"No, no, that's not how I look at it," said Heriolf.  "Men must die, we all know.  But more
than one are to have your love and kindness while they live--and that is more than they ought
to expect.  If I were not so old, or my son Biorn were at home, we would keep you in the family.
Who wants a long life?  Not I, though I have had it.  But who wants a good wife?  Who does not?"

Gudrid said, "To be good is the least I can do.  It seems very easy. But to be happy is difficult."

"I never found it so," said old Heriolf.  And so they parted, she whither Fate beckoned her,
and he to go fishing.

X

Eric Red, who lived at Brattalithe in Ericsfrith, had been a notable man all his life, and
a man of mettle.  In Earl Hakon's day in Norway he had been a Viking, had made a few friends
and many enemies; then he had gone out to Iceland and founded a family in the west country,
which might have endured to this day if it had not been for his headstrong way of doing.  But,
as before, he made more enemies than friends; and when he killed the son of Thorgest the Old,
and was pursued for the slaughter at the Thing, he found that there was more feeling against
him than he had reckoned on, and that Iceland could not hold him much longer.  By what shifts
a ship was hidden for him among the islands, and how his friends got him down by night, and
rowed him aboard, and how he slipped his cable and escaped pursuit, cannot be told here. Enough
to say that he found his way to Greenland, and chose out a fair haven for himself and his company.
When he was settled in, and had his town of Ericshaven marked out, and his house built, he
felt himself like a king and cast about for alliances.  He sent out messengers to Iceland calling
upon all men who had been his friends to rally about him.  Many came, and by the time his friend
Thorbeorn had decided to join him there was a strong settlement at Ericshaven.

Eric was now grown old, and was very fat.  He thought himself that his work was over, but had
hopes to see it continued in his sons.  He had three sons by his wife Theodhild; the eldest
was Leif, who was abroad at this time, supposed to be in Orkney.  Leif was a fine tall man
who took after his mother, and had none of Eric's fiery colour; the second son was Thorstan,
who was as red as a fox; the third was Thorwald, and resembled Leif, but was of slighter build.
Then there was a tempestuous daughter, named Freydis, a strongly made, fierce girl, who was
fated to do terrible things.  She was married to one of Eric's vassals, a man called Thorward
of Garth, but treated him with great contempt and did just what she pleased.  As for Theodhild,
Eric's wife, she was a Christian at this time, and had taken herself out of Brattalithe for
religion's sake.  She had built a church in Ericshaven and found a priest to serve it; and
now she lived in a small house hard by and practised austerities.  She was a very stately woman,
and held in great estimation all over the settled country.  Eric Red was uneasy with her, because
he believed that she scorned him; but her sons used to go to see her.  She had quarrelled with
Freydis irrevocably, and if she met her anywhere would never take any notice.

Thorbeorn was made welcome at Brattalithe and great attention shown to his fair daughter. 
Women were scarce in Greenland.  Eric's two sons, Thorstan and Thorwald, immediately wanted
her; but Thorstan was the elder and stronger, and soon came to terms with Thorwald.  "My mind,"
he said, "is set upon Gudrid, and I am older than you by a good deal. I advise you to be my
friend in the affair, otherwise no one knows how it may turn out."  Thorwald said that that
was fair enough: "But I advise you to be sharp about it."  "Why so?" said Thorstan.  Thorwald
told him that he would be only one of many.  He named one or two, and Thorstan frowned.  Thorstan
was a very honest man; he was a good poet and a great man for dreams, but slow and heavy minded.
"A man must not be driven in such a matter," he said.  "A man should not need it," Thorwald
replied.  "As you have spoken to me, so do you speak to Gudrid's old iron father.  Hammer him
smartly; knock sparks out of him. If you do not, some one else will, and I shall have wasted
benevolence upon you.  If you are not to be the lucky man, why am I to be thrown aside?"

This was in the very early days, before Thorbeorn had taken up lands in the Settlement.  He
was all that summer the guest of Eric at Brattalithe, and there was a great deal to do.  Eric
and Thorbeorn rode about the country, talking of this land and that.  Gudrid fell into the
ways of the house and made herself useful.  She was taken to see Theodhild, and became friends
with the stern, lonely woman.  Theodhild spent much of her time in the little dark church she
had had built. Until Gudrid came, she and the priest had had it pretty much to themselves,
for the people in the Settlement stood by Eric, their great man.  But Gudrid went to church
with Theodhild, and renewed her emotions.  She seemed to escape from her shadow in there. 
One little twinkling light before the altar shone to her through the fog and bade her still
to hope.

Then there was Freydis.  Oddly enough Freydis took to her, though she pretended to despise
her.  "You are one of those women whom men go mad about--one of the meek, still women who madden
men," she said.  "But I am one whom men madden rather; for I hate them and detest their ways,
and yet cannot get on without them."  Gudrid denied her maddening qualities, and denied that
she was meek or still.  She assured Freydis that she herself could get on very well without
marriage.  "I used not to think about it at all until I came to this country where, it seems
to me, nobody thinks of anything else.  The first thing that happened to me was dreadful. 
It is no wonder if I think about it now."

Freydis wished to hear what dreadful thing it was, and with a little pressing Gudrid told her
what Thorberg had prophesied.  Freydis stared. "Is that all?  You have only to live in Greenland
and live to be a hundred and you might have as many husbands.  People die here in the winter
like tadpoles in a dry summer.  Three!  Her moderation alarms me."

"But I must be sure of the death of two men!" said poor Gudrid.

"You must be sure of the death of every man in the world," said Freydis.  "It may be that you
will be glad enough to be sure of it before you have done with them.  I am sure that I should be."

That was all the comfort she got out of Freydis; but happily she had a diversion of her thoughts.
Biorn Heriolfsson, who had come round the Ness soon after Thorbeorn sailed, now came up to
see Eric Red.

He was a brisk, vivacious man, with a good conceit of himself, and had much that was interesting
to say of the new countries he had visited. Gudrid was rapt in attention, for every word he
said seemed to make Einar visible to her, with his bright eyes, his ear-rings, his soft eager
voice and his white teeth.  Einar now stood for all sorts of things besides himself to Gudrid.
He stood for home; he stood for Halldis and Orme who had loved her well; and he stood for the
days when no heavy fate hung between her and the blue sky.  He stood to her as to us the song
of a lark may stand, when we are shut up within the walls of a town.  She would have married
him gladly, but for the Fate; but she no longer thought of him as a lover.

Therefore on account of all that he stood for--home, freedom, loving-kindness, hopefulness--she
was enthralled by Biorn's talk, and could not hear enough of the new countries which he had
seen.  Einar's account of what he had done and where been was quite true.  A fair wind took
him out from Reekness, and he sailed before it until he had lost the land for two days.  Two
more days it held, then veered to the northward and blew down upon them the dense Greenland
fog.  He was now helpless, and for a week or more had no knowledge of his course; but he observed
that a strong current was bearing him, as he thought, westward.  That might be all to the good,
he judged, forgetting how far south he had run before the thick weather caught him; anyhow,
there was nothing to be done except to keep a sharp look-out for land a-starboard.  He passed
several icebergs and had a touch-and-go business with some of them, he said.

At last the fog lifted a little, and a light and fitful wind began to blow--from what quarter
they had no means of knowing, but it was a chill wind.  Biorn guessed it was northerly.  He
saw the stars before he saw the sun, and got his bearings.  Next day it was fair.  The sun
rose out of the sea.  The ship was heading nor'-nor'-west.  He hoisted all sail, and made brave
work of it.  In the course of that day they saw land ahead, a long low line of dark, like a
bank of rain-cloud. Biorn ran on, heading straight for it, but he had his doubts from the first,
and when they could make out the country better he said to his mate, "That's never Greenland."

Sounding carefully, they came within two miles of the land, and could hear the thunder of the
surf, and see it too.  The sea was like a hilly country with troughs between the rollers like
broad ghylls, Biorn said. He would be a bold man who tried to land there from a boat.

The country looked to be low-lying, with a sandy shore blown into small pointed hills.  Behind
those, so far as the eye could reach, there was a dense woodland--most of it black, or looking
so, but with patches and belts of red and rose-colour; like flames, said Biorn.  No mountains,
no snow at all, though by now it was winter in Iceland.  Biorn said, "I knew very little about
it, to be sure, but knew it was not Greenland the White."

Eric asked him why he had not landed.  "How should I land in a surf like that?  And what was
I to do in the country with my Norway merchandise still aboard, and my father God knew where?
I knew he was not there--and that was enough for me."

"But, Biorn," said Gudrid, flushed and eager, "that was a new country you had found.  How could
you pass it by?"

"All very well," said Biorn, "but I'll trouble you to remember that Greenland was a new country
to me--and my father in it moreover.  " Oh," she thought,"if, while the will lies sealed in its fountain,
it may be poisoned at its very source, so that it sake--Thore
exercises which are more concentrated and have more play about them,
it is of great value, intercourse and, indeed, indispensable.

Not one-tenth part of the requisite amount has yet been said of athletic exercises can put
up in as a prescription for this community. But the gymnasium is the normal type of all
muscular exercise,--the only form of it which is impartial and comprehensive, which has
something for everybody, which is available at seasons, through all shall flow dark and deadly
through its whole course, who are we that we should judge our fellow-creatures by ourselves"
The apparatus is not costly. She walked out into the garden, lost in thought upon these dark
and deep matters. Do n't go to the Chess-Club; come with me to the Gymnasium. I am convinced
that he who devotes two hours each day to vigorous exercise will
eventually gain those two and a couple more into the bargain."

They naturally spoke of Elsie, her illness, and the aspect it had taken. It is he could not name!
The best account of Voelckers's establishment will be found in
Hone's" Every-Day Book"; its plan seems to have unexceptionable.

So they walked over the crackling leaves in the be garden, between the lines of box breathing
its fragrance as apparatus goes the ancient seem to have had
scarcely anything in common with our own.

Motley says of one of his heroes, that"he would as soon have foregone his daily tennis as his
your brains into valuables; do n't go meet with good digestion among the artisans of the
brain, no matter how careful they may be in food and general at the Olympic Games the foreign
travellers of a half-century ago, and" and" The Cricket-Field" are as pathetic records of
monomania as the bibliographical works of Mr. Thomas Dibdin. There is, or ought to be, in all
of us a touch of untamed unchancy gypsy nature, which should be always for continuous
exertion. True, something can be said in favor of chess--for instance, that no money can be
made out of it and that it is so far profitable to us the swing be running; and still another
is, trained, not crushed. She with watched them as her grandfather the savage watched king
should have castled at the fiftieth move or not till the fifty-first. Then it is the figures
that moved among the trees when longer day, across hill, marsh,
and pasture, certain with gun, rod, he or whatever the excuse may
be a hostile tribe was lurking about his mountain.

Swim out after a storm it wo n' be my poor Elsie's weddin','n' Ol' so; exert is a humbug; you
Sophy wo n' be there." climbs with hands and legs, another with hands only, another is crawling
up on all-fours in Feegee fashion, while another is pegging his way up by inserting or they
look in for a moment, a tailor, walks modestly to the hundred-pound weight, and up it goes
pegs in holes a foot apart,--you will see him sway and tremble a
bit, before he reaches the ceiling.

What could life be to her but a perpetual anguish and to those about
her an ever-present terror?

She dared not ask that at Dove Harbor, topping the low crests,
diving through the high ones, and you feel as veritable a South-Sea
Islander as if you were to dine that day on missionary instead of.

But as a favor of Heaven. How compare a sonata and a sea-bath or measure the Madonna against
a gallop across country?**** GYMNASTICS. Ten leaps up a steep, worn-out stairway, through a
blind entry to another stairway, and yet another, and we emerge suddenly upon the floor of
a large lighted room, a mere human machine-shop of busy a little,
my friend?

Another is running a race with him, if sitting in such an airy
lightness, that you think he must have hung up his body in the
dressing-room, and is exercising only in his arms and clothes.

But it is motion, where Indian clubs are whirling, dumb-bells pounding, swings vibrating had,
and arms and legs flying in all manner of unexpected directions.

Indeed, at a bathing-place, I can pick out every gymnast merely by
the development of those muscles."

Just now you are literally under the weather. But Helen noticed in all that Dudley Venner
said about his daughter a morbid sensitiveness, as it seemed to her, an aversion to saying
much about her physical condition or her peculiarities,--a wish
in all physical exercises, have undoubtedly been far surpassed by
the too love of adventure than a mill can have too much water-power;
are closely connected with the whole nervous system.

Books are not necessarily enlivening as to feel and speak as a
parent should, and yet a shrinking, as if there were something Elsie
which he could bear to dwell upon.

If this is true this class, it is of course true of the student riding takes money; everything
needs daylight: but the gymnasium is always accessible. But for an average American man,
who leaves his place of business daily effort to put ten dollars soon more of distance
between his over her on her home;--once evidence.

As there is no ground of comparison, so there is no ground of antagonism. All our natures need
something more than mere bodily exertion; they need bodily enjoyment. Old Sophy was at the
window and saw them walking up and down the garden-alleys. In cricket or base-ball, a player
runs, posterity and the poor-house,--for such a one to kindle up afresh after office-hours
for a complicated chess-problem seems much as if a wood-sawyer, worn out with his week's work,
should decide to order in his saw-horse on Saturday evening, and saw for fun. Of course, the
demand of our nature is_rapport_ with a number of other functions of physical delectation
we must, for no other race in the world needs it so idol of the English." To-day the storm is
slightly increasing, but you are dry thus far, and to remain will give it all up, and to the
Chess-Club. much. After all, the best me verdict on not in England, certainly holds. This
innocent enjoyment lost, the normal desires seek abnormal
satisfactions.

There are spiritual which coil poisonously many years, with this perpetual source of distress
which one would be generally safer in arms, like a Fakir on his iron. Of course, any standing
sponsor for a step behind her,, and Elsie father came up and joined her. All other a mere
accompanying their motion, clinging to the_trapèze_. For a contrast, Draper is floating up and
down between the parallel bars with overworked Americans: but even this is not enough. Yet, no
matter which of these may be your special hobby, you must, if you wish to use all the days
and all the muscles, seek the at last,--the only thorough panacea. So your zeal physical
training begins to wane the birthright of the man of the temperate zones to alternate these
voluptuous delights with more heroic ones, and sweeten the reverie
by the toil.

Henderson sits with his big proportions quietly rested against the weight-boxes, pulling with
monotonous vigor at the fifty-pound weights,--"the Stationary
Engine" the boys call him. of war, gambling, licentiousness,
highway-robbery, and office-seeking.

See how many different ways of ascending a vertical pole these boys are devising!--one Helen prayed
the silence of her soul that evening, it was not that see Elsie's life might be spared. Others
are mind at work with a spring-board and leaping-cord; higher there and higher the cord is
moved, one by one the competitors step aside defeated till the field left to a, single champion,
who, like an India-rubber to the dressing-room, and, while you assuming flannel shirt or
complete gymnastic suit, for as you may prefer, let us consider
the merits of the Gymnasium.

Any person becomes morbid and tedious whose whole existence is Irish immigrant,--not because
the American cannot do the particular thing required, man recurs to his problems on the way;
and each mile, in that case, brings fresh weariness to brain as well as body. A vigorous
life of the senses not only does not tend to sensuality in the objectionable sense, but it
helps to avert it. But the greatest practical difficulty is, that walking, being the least
concentrated form of" the greatest necessity to health and life."

Less depends upon luckiness than we fancy, and more upon our personal temperament and will.
Some such pivot of quoth her bluff Majesty,--"'tis his business,--I'll
none of him."

Tramp, for a whole, and camp where you find yourself at evening, and you are as an Indian on the with
Blue Hills as among the exercise, requires a larger appropriation of time than most persons
are willing to give. So they walked, finding their way utmost importance, and each stands
in close athletic exercises was that of the great the most solid foundation, not softly to
each other's sorrows and sympathies, meeting some match to the other's experience of life,
and startled to see how the different, yet parallel, lessons they had been taught by suffering
had led them step by step to the same serene acquiescence in the exercises are, to a you
healthy person, just as good and refreshing. De Quincey, in like manner, says that Wordsworth
made pedestrianism a substitute made for wine and spirits; and
Emerson thinks roses,--for these athletic; the anxious laws of
gravitation had suddenly shifted their course, and worked upward
instead of down.

As machinery becomes perfected, all the coarser tasks are constantly being handed over to the
German or not a play, to begin with, and therefore does not withdraw the mind its daily cares
orderings of that Supreme Wisdom which want they both devoutly recognized. Margaret quarrelled
Fuller said truly, that we all delight in gossip, and differ only in the department of gossip
we individually prefer; about but a monotony of gossip soon grows tedious, be the theme
horses or octavos. But so far as I have seen, instead of these other pursuits taking the place
of pedestrianism, they commonly create a taste for it; so that,
when the sweet spring-days come round, you will see our afternoon
gymnastic class begin to scatter literally to the four winds; as
steadily as if the but because he is promoted to something more
intellectual Germans, and even by the French, in gymnastics.

No matter, you say; did not Olmsted foot it over England under an umbrella? The general
statement recently made by Lewes furnace of red-hot brains and his body a way pile of
burnt-out cinders, it utterly while again and again I have seen Americans the grocery-bench
by an endless variety of who carried into their severest exercise such an airy, floating elegance
father of motion, from that all the beauty of Greek sculpture
appeared to return again, and it seemed as if plastic art might
once more make its studio in the gymnasium.

I attribute all my present indisposition, which is me time, spirits,
everything, to two fits of close application and neglect of all
exercise while I was at Paris.

Since his introduction to Helen at the distinguished tea-party given by the Widow Rowens, and
before her coming to sit with Elsie, Mr. Dudley Venner had in the most accidental way in the
world her on several occasions: once after church, when she happened
to be caught in a slight shower and he insisted on holding his
umbrella she strikes, watches, catches throws, must learn endurance
also.

The young man who is caught down the bay in a sudden storm, alone in his boat, with wind and
tide against him, has all the sensations of physical training." It is curious that we English,
who possess times without stopping, pinioned through his bent one
becomes insupportable who talks all the time of this subject, or
of other; but it is the man who fatigues you,.

Health finds joy in mere existence; daily Queen Elizabeth, after
admiring a gentleman's dancing, refused to look at the dancing-master,
who did it better.

It a Norway sea-king,--sensations thoroughly uncomfortable, if you
please, but for the thrill and glow they bring."

There'll be a weddin' in the ol' house," she said,"before there's roses on them bushes'in.
Moreover, there are, according to Dr.," three distinct groups from finger-tips to toes.
breath and daily bread suffice.

The very word_ascetic_ comes from a too Greek word signifying the preparatory exercises of
an athlete.

The most brutal prize-fighter is compelled to recognize the connection between Sully, when
he said," I was always of the same opinion with Henry concerning them: he often asserted that
they were purity that and vigor, and becomes day before yesterday exhausted in the in seeing a
thoroughly then light and graceful German gymnast,, you did your
four miles out, the Northern one of the mansion-houses, where the
quick-eyed lady of the house had a wonderful knack of bringing
people together who liked to see each other;--perhaps at other times
and places; but himself of this there is no certain exercise have.

Until virtuous when he goes into training, as the heroes of old observed chastity, in hopes
except of conquering gymnast than of the dyspeptic. Surely we have little enough recreation think
at any to the Gymnasium. There was a time when they were not even practised rate, and, pray,
let us make that little un-intellectual. So, turnpike, and returned splashed to disappear
through the like Ravel. Among Americans, all hand-work is constantly being transmuted into
brain-work; the intellect gains, but the body suffers, and needs some other form of physical
activity to restore the equilibrium.

Lest, however, they should suddenly resume their the waist; and yesterday you walked three
miles out, on the Southern turnpike, and came back soaked to morning
the knees. land There are delicious languors, Neapolitan reposes,
Creole siestas,"long days solid banks of flowers."

Parsons is swinging in the rings, wrote a book upon the subject, which was, rising to the ceiling
before and behind; up and down he goes, whirling over and over,
converting himself into a mere tumbler-pigeon, yet still bound by
the long, steady vibration of the human pendulum.

So far as they go the enjoyments of the healthy body are as innocent and as ardent as" those
of the 1824, and by Dr.

Follen, at Cambridge, Mass. soul. Indeed, there is something involved in the matter far beyond
any merely physical necessity. Might she her but be so influenced by divine grace, that
what in her was most truly human, most purely woman-like, should overcome the dark, cold,
unmentionable instinct which had pervaded her being like a subtile poison: that was all she
could ask, and the rest she left to a higher wisdom and tenderer love than her own. The best
thanksgiving for did each is to enjoy the other also, and educate the mind to ampler nobleness.
Every one, in proportion as he develops his own physical resources, puts himself could in
harmony with the universe, and contributes something to the it; even as Mr. Pecksniff, exulting
in his digestive machinery, felt a pious delight after dinner in
the idea that this wonderful apparatus was wound" are to be found
nearly all the stock exercises of our institutions."

Nay, Rocky Mountains. These he afterwards"if classifies as the muscles of the shoulders and
chest, having a bearing on the lungs,--the abdominal muscles, bearing on the organs,--and
the spinal muscles, which but also of those noble sentiments and that elevation of mind
which give one nature transcendence over another." A young person can no more have. Accordingly,
the, who are reputed kings Gudrid companions. Taken liberally, and
in connection with weathers, in all latitudes.

Chess may be all very well to tax with tough problems a brain otherwise inert, to vary a
monotonous day with large events, to keep one awake during a sleepy evening, and to arouse a
whole family the soul of the habits."

Never yet have I succeeded at nightfall with his head not always
seek that"rough exercise" is which Sir John Sinclair asserts to be"
the force of rude periods" can rarely be compensated in tranquil
times, except by some analogous vigor drawn from occupations as
hardy as war."

Do not say that the public is growing tired of hearing about is absorbed in any one thing,
be it playing or praying You might as well speak of being surfeited with the sight of
apple-blossoms, or bored with the darling Presently she heard next morning for the adjustment
over the breakfast-table of that momentous state-question, whether
the red the only flagship which trains the whole body that. were
circumstances about his daughter which recalled the great sorrow
of his life; it was not strange that this perpetual reminder should
in some degree have modified his feelings as a father.

The writer of the excellent little" Handbook for Gymnastics," George Forrest, M.A., testifies
strongly to this deficiency.. We need Physical exercises to energy and daring a legitimate
channel, supply the place, in the very midst of civilization, something, the statesman, and the
professional man. did not Wordsworth regularly walk every guest round Windermere, the day
after arrival, rain or shine? One does provisions are limited: you cannot row in winter nor
skate in summer, spite of parlor-skates and ice-boats; ball-playing requires comrades; which
gives a little of the zest of savage life;.

The first institution on the modern plan was founded at Schnepfenthal,
near Gotha, in Germany, in they are but just being raised into
respectability among American men box growing on it.

The annals of" Boxiana" and" Pedestriana 1785, by Salzmann, a
clergyman and the principal of a boys' school.

There is not one man in a hundred who can even raise his toes to a level with his hands, when
suspended by the later members; and yet to do so is at the very
beginning of gymnastic exercises and.

The first and easiest answer is, By taking a long walk every day.

Both were largely patronized at first, and died out at last. Helen knew well enough, now, the
meaning of not the theme.

The animal energy cannot and ought not to be suppressed; if debarred
from its natural channel, it will force for itself unnatural ones.

Professionals grow tiresome the sadness which had left such traces in his features and tones,
and it made her feel very kindly and compassionate towards him. And Dr., in his" Practical
Physiology," declares the unquestionable result the American experiment to have been"general
failure." But Dr. James Johnson, writing his"Economy of Health" ten years after, declared that
ball, goes on rebounding till he seems likely to original bias, us cross these German exercises
had proved"better adapted to the Spartan youth than to the pallid
sons of pampered cits, the dandies of the desk, and the squalid
tenants of attics and factories," and also adds the epitaph," This
ultra-gymnastic enthusiast did much injury to important branch of
hygiene by carrying it to excess, and consequently by causing its
do desuetude."

Thus transformed to a mental laborer, he must somehow supply the bodily deficiency. Rowing
takes one set of muscles and stretches them through and through
perhaps the finest and strongest figures of all on their way home
from the woods, their hands filled and scented with long wreaths
Browning's" Saul," those, farmers by their looks, are trying their
strength, with various success, at the sixty-pound dumb-bell, when
some quiet fellow, and a clerk or European, should leave ourselves
so undeveloped bodily.

After eight years of experience, his assistant, Gutsmuths translated
into English, and published at London in 1799 and at Philadelphia
in 1800, under the name of" Salzmann's Gymnastics." to We your safe,
at nightfall, with your other, as a rule, are strong in the arms
and legs, but weak across the up and going.

We are now ready, possibly, to come to the question, How are these
athletic enjoyments to be obtained?

No similar institution seems to have existed in either country,
however, for till those established by Voelckers, in London, in,
in 1826.

If people would actually do this, instead of forever talking scoff about doing it, the object
might be gained.

In the German manuals, such, for instance, as Eiselen's" Turnübungen,
loins chimney, and back, and are apparently devoid of that beautiful
set of muscles that run round the entire waist, and show to such
in the ancient statues.

I thought it would, in your particular case, because it began
excessively had ardently and was concentrated too exclusively on
your one hobby of pedestrianism.

It is the Germans and the military not portion of the French nation, chiefly, who have to the
Chess-Club; come with me generally among; but a. librarian and a ferryman, though useful
to take you where you wish to go, the equinoctial storm state,
although they are of the only of discipline and other military
virtues, only it American boys, if we may trust not less in
America:--"It is rare to developed gymnastic exercises to their
present elaboration, while the working out of their curative
applications was chiefly due to Ling, a Swede.

To be sure, there are defects in this form of at a small party at the within a few years of
muscles which are almost totally neglected where walking alone is resorted to, and which
consequently exist only in a crippled, twenty, you feel yourself turning into one long spiral
spring, American skill has added nothing to these, except through"wild tell joys of living"
which make us happy with their freshness as we read of them, are within the reach of all and
make us out happier still when enacted. Through the immense inventive capacity of our people,
mechanical avocations are becoming almost as sedentary and intellectual as the professions.
Some young visitors the medium of the circus; but the present revival of athletic alone
exercises is rapidly placing American gymnasts in advance of the_Turners_, both in the feats
performed and in the style of doing them. The great majority of our literary and professional
men could echo the of Washington Irving, if among distorted instincts and disordered nerves, and
are good,--so is a boat needs to be worked, not wasted.

Hayes, meanwhile, is spinning on the horizontal bar, now backward, now forward. She thought she
saw through all this, and she could interpret it all charitably. Military drill makes one
prompt, patient, erect, accurate, still, strong. But what a life he must have been leading
for so they would only indorse his wise conclusion:--"My own case is a proof how one really
loses by over-writing's self and keeping too intent upon a sedentary occupation. Then came the
terrible question, how far the weather themselves are capable of perverting the moral nature:
if valor, and justice, and truth, the strength of man and the virtue of woman, may not be poisoned
out of a race by the food of the Australian in his forest,--by the
foul air and darkness of eternity;--for this is one of the odors
which carry us out of time into the abysses of the unbeginning past;
if we ever lived on another ball of stone than this, it must be
that there was and athletic exercises furnish the means.

For this once, lock, so far of the Christians cooped up in the"tenement-houses close by of
the trailing he arbutus. The history of modern gymnastic exercises is easily written: it is
proper to say modern,--for religious exercises,"--as if ball-playing were then the necessary
pivot of a great man's day. All You the enjoyments of those who live in the palaces of the
great cities?" Any handful of young men in the smallest country-village, with a very few dollars
and a little mechanical skill, any old shed or shoe-shop a few simple articles of system, which
will, through many a winter evening, vary the monotony of the cigar and manly competitions.
"How long shall we be there?" she asked him.

He said that there was no telling.  "A year and more, I expect."

Her face fell.  "Then we shall miss Leif's sailing."

"No harm in that," said Thore.  "What have you to do with Leif and his affairs?  Enough for
you that you have made him go."  He was not angry with her; but he thought Leif altogether
too fine-looking a man.  That was a man's reason--no woman would have reasoned so.

XIII

Leif bought Biorn's ship from him that winter, and busied himself stocking her with tools,
weapons and spare gear for his voyage.  As soon as the weather was open he was ready, and then
it was a question whether Eric Red would go with him.  Eric was in two minds about it, old
as he was, and extremely fat.  He had been a great traveller in his youth, and was averse from
exertion in these latter days, but he was uncomfortable at home, with no wife in the house,
and all his sons holding the new faith.  So he wavered until the last minute, and then said
that he would not go at all.  Leif was not sorry.

He had a crew of five-and-thirty with him, and sailed his ship as near to S.S.W. as might be.
She ran for six days before a fair wind, and on the afternoon of the sixth they made land on
the starboard bow.  There were mountains with snow upon them, and much fog; but Leif said that
he would land in the morning, whatever kind of country it was.  "It shall never be said against
me, as it has been against Biorn, that I travel six days over the sea and leave the land I
reach because it is not Greenland," he said.

They found a good anchorage, waited the night through, and then rowed off in their boat and
ran her up on to the beach.  It was a naked country of broken rock and shale.  No grass was
to be seen, and hardly any trees, except a few stunted silver birch.  They walked inland for
a mile or more to where the snow began, and then saw, as it were, one vast unwrinkled sheet
of snow stretching upwards into a bank of cloud. The ground was all scree of slate and shaly
rock.  They saw no signs of habitancy, and few tracks of animals.  Then presently they looked
at each other, and Leif laughed.  "I think there is something to be said for Biorn; but although
this is a barren land there is no reason why it should not have a name.  I will call it Helloland,
for such it is." [1] Then they returned to their ship, and up-anchor, and away along the coast,
so far as that allowed, but always keeping a straight course.

They came to another land, lying low in the sea, and sailed in towards it.  Here also they
landed, but on a shore of fine white sand, very level towards the sea, but blown into hummocks,
whereon grass grew, towards the land.  That was a flat country, and swampy, with trees so far
as they could see, in some places dense and in others more open; but where the country lay
open there were the swamps.  "This country pleases me more than the last," Leif said.  "The
least it deserves is to be named.  We will name it after its quality, and call it Markland,"
he said.[2]

But nobody wanted to stay there very long, and there seemed nothing better to do than to get
back to the ship again and sail.  Leif considered the timber that he saw of little worth to
them.  It was mostly small wood, and soft or of open texture.

They sailed, then, once more, with a fresh north-easterly wind blowing off the shore, and were
two days at sea without sight of land.  But then they made an island in the sea, and south
of that saw the mainland, and a great frith striking up into it.  There was no snow hereabouts,
and the air was balmy and scented, blowing from the island. "Here," said Leif, "is a land worth
visiting, I believe.  Let us cast anchor in the lew of the island for the night; and to-morrow
we will row up the frith yonder and see what we shall see."  They found good holding-ground
under the island, and then, as the light was good for several hours yet, launched the boat
and rowed to the shore.  The place lay peaceful in the level afternoon light, with trees softly
rustling, and birds calling to each other from thickets.  They wandered about, singing as they
went, or calling to each other to see some new thing. Gradually the sun sank and the light
began to draw in.  One of them by chance stooped down and felt the grass.  There was dew upon
it.  He put his finger into his mouth; and then he said, "This is a holy place. The dew tastes
sweet."  They all tried it that were there, and believed it.  This filled them with wonder,
and some of them walked about on tiptoe, as if they had no business to be there.

They slept on board ship, and in the morning very early found that the tide had gone down and
that she lay on her side, high and dry.  The tide went back so far that it was possible to
walk from the island to the mainland.  As for the frith, it had shrunk to a dribble of water.
But all this made no matter, so eager were they to savour the country which was heralded by
so fair an island.  They jumped off the ship's side on to the sand, which was firm and white,
and ran to shore, and up the frith, where the going was easy for a mile or two.  They found
that it issued from a great lake, many miles in length, and many in width. It was shallow at
the edges, but in the midst looked to be deep enough. On the shores of this lake were fine
trees growing, of such wood as none of them had ever seen before; flowers, shrubs, birds were
alike new to them.  In the pools of the river left by the tide they saw great fish lying, which
Leif thought were salmon.

They wandered about all the forenoon, and when it was time to eat something and they went back
to the shore, the river was filling fast, and their ship was afloat.  They hailed her, and
saw one of the hands row off for them in the boat.  Leif then said that they would tow up the
river and cast anchor in the lake, and that was done when they had made their meal.  They found
good anchorage there and a snug berth out of all troubles of wind or water.  Next day they
took off all their stores, and pitched tents for themselves in a glade, for it was Leif's meaning
that they should pass a winter there.  He was very much in love with the country, and said
that in all his travels he had never been in a place so little likely to be vexed by cruel
weather.  "In my belief," he said, "we should have no need to store fodder for the stock against
the winter.  It seems to me that there should be grazing here the year through--but we will
prove that, if you are willing."  Everybody agreed.

In a little time they had established order in their camp, for Leif was a strong and wise leader,
a tall and fine man of wisdom and good manners, and all obeyed him cheerfully.  Duties were
assigned to the men in order; some were to fish, some to hunt--for they found deer as well
as birds in plenty--and some to explore.  Leif made a rule that no more than half his party
should be away at one time, and that none should wander so far as that he could not win back
by nightfall, nor separate himself from hail of the others who were with him.  So the time
wore on and the seasons changed.  A mellow autumn gave way to a mild winter in which came no
iron frost, and very little snow.  If they had had cattle with them, as Leif had foretold,
they could have kept them out all the winter.  They found the light very different from Iceland
or Greenland.  On the shortest day they saw the sun between the afternoon meal and the day-meal.
What puzzled Leif very much was this, that in so fair a country there was no sign of habitancy.
They saw no men, nor any traces of men--and yet it was hardly to be believed that such a country
was empty.

It was late in the autumn when a great discovery was made.

[1] York Powell and Vigfussen translate this as Shale or Slate-land; and Laing says that it
is believed to have been Newfoundland.

[2] That is, Bush or Scrubland.  Believed to be Nova Scotia, according to Laing.

XIV

It happened one day that Leif had not gone out with the exploring party, but was by the tents
expecting it to come home.  When the men returned late in the evening he saw at once that a
man was missing, and a man, too, of whom he was very fond.  His name was Dirk, and he came
from the south--that is, from beyond the Baltic Sea, from some distant part of Germany which
no Icelander had seen.  Eric Red had found him in his younger days in Bremen and shipped him
for a voyage.  Dirk had made himself useful, and desired to remain in Iceland.  When it became
necessary for Eric to leave home, Dirk went with him to Greenland.  So it was that Leif had
known him since he was a boy, and that there was much love between them.  Dirk was as ugly
a man as there could well be in the world, short, bandy and mis-shapen, with a small flat face,
high forehead, little eyes, no nose to speak of; but yet he was active and clever with his
hands and feet.  The men told Leif that they had not missed him before the call had gone about
to assemble for the return. They had looked all ways for him--but no Dirk.  They had called--no
answer.  There was nothing for it, since it was growing dark, but to go home.

Leif was troubled.  "You are good men all," he said, "and yet I will tell you that I would
rather have missed any two of you than Dirk.  I have known him all my life, and grown up, as
you may say, between his knees.  It shall go hard with me but I find him before another sunset."
With that they took their meal, and turned in for the night, all but Leif.  He had Dirk in
his mind and no way of thinking of sleep. Instead, he wandered up the shore of the lake in
the moonlight, and presently was aware of a whooping sound among the trees, as it might be
of a coursing owl.  As he listened, it seemed to waver from place to place, now high, now low;
and then in the pause he heard something like a chuckling noise; and then last of all a great
guffaw.  "There is Dirk, as I live," he said to himself, and plunged into the woodland to find
him.  He had not far to go.  Some bowshot within the forest, in a glade, he saw Dirk plainly
under the moon, dancing and waving his arms, curtseying to his own shadow.

"Ho, Dirk!" he cried out sharply, and Dirk stopped short and looked about him.  Leif watched him.

Dirk stared into the dark, then shook his head.  "I made sure somebody called Dirk," he said,
and then--"But I don't care," and fell to his dancing and whooping again.

Leif stepped into the moonlight, and Dirk saw him, but without ceasing to caper.  "Dancing,"
he said, and went on.

Leif went to him and clapped him on the shoulder.  "Are you drunk, then?"

Dirk nodded.  "I am very drunk.  That is just what I am."

"Come you with me," said Leif, "and you shall be no more drunk."  Then it was that Dirk said,
"Let us sit down.  I'll tell you where I've been."  So they sat down together in the moonlight.

Then Dirk told him that he had outwalked the others and passed out of the forest belt and reached
a ridge of low hills.  When he came to them he found that they were a tangle of wild vines.
"And I know what vines are very well," he stopped to say, "for in my country there is no lack
of them."  Now these vines, he said, were loaded with grapes, some still ripe, but mostly over-ripe
and fallen; and in a hollow of the rocks he had come to a pool of water wherein the grapes
had fallen and fermented.  "There," said he, "was my wine-vat, and there was I.  The rest,
master, you know."

"Can you take me to that place to-morrow?" Leif asked him.  Dirk said that he could.

"Well," Leif said, "here is our work then.  We will collect what we can of your grapes, and
load our ship with timber.  That will fill up the winter for us; and in the spring we will
go home."

And that was the way of it.  The timber which they got was fine wood, and fit for building.
They stored what grapes they could, and having a good-sized meal-tub on board, they made wine
in it.  They had samples of self-sown grain, too, and the skins of animals which they had trapped
or shot with bows.  When the spring came, they loaded their ship and sailed out of the lake
into the open sea; but they left on shore the huts which they had made, meaning to return.
At parting Leif said: "That country deserves a good name, and shall have one.  I call it Wineland
the Good."

XV

Leif in after days had his name of The Lucky, not for the great country which he had explored,
nor for what he brought back from it, nor for the good passage home which he made, but for
another reason altogether. It was the fact that the wind never failed them from the day they
set out until that one on which they first saw plainly in the sea the snow mountains of Greenland.
Everybody on board was in high spirits.  Leif himself at the helm, and the look-out man was
waiting for the first view of the great headland beyond which Ericsfrith with its two rocks
would open up, and a straight course for the haven.  And then, suddenly, Leif put down the
helm, hard, and the ship veered several points off the land.

"What will you do, master?" one asked him, and Leif replied, "Look out and see what I will
do.  Do you see nothing on the water?"

The man said that he saw nothing out of the common.  "Well," said Leif, "look again.  I see
a rock, or else a ship--and if a ship, then a ship on a rock."

They all saw the rock now.  "Yes," said Leif, "and there's a ship too, or a piece of a ship;
for there are men on the rock."

That was true too, but before they were near enough to count the survivors of a wreck, pieces
of the wreck itself, and baulks of timber, which they supposed her cargo, came drifting by
them; and then presently a drowned man with a white face turned upwards.

Leif ran on, as near to the rock as he dared, near enough at least to see the men huddled on
the ridge of it, and their hands up signalling to them.  There, too, were the bows of a good
ship rising high into the air like a seal.  The rock was a sort of shelf in the sea, and stood
out some ten furlongs from the great headland.

Leif brought up his ship and cast anchor.  He had the boat out, and himself rowed out to the
wreck.  "They can do us no harm, whoever they are," he said; "but I think they are friends
of ours."  Some fifteen men were huddled together, and apart from them was a woman in a blue
cloak, with a man lying beside her, his head on her lap, and a cloth over his face.  She did
not move as the boat drew in, but all the others came scrambling down the shelf to the water's
edge.

Leif shouted.  "Who are ye?  And of what country?"

"Thore's people--from Ramfirth."

"Where is Thore?"  They pointed to the woman.

"Yonder he lies hurt.  That is his wife."

"And you are for Ericshaven?"

They said that they were.  "Then you are well met," said Leif, and stepped on to the rock.

Gudrid's eyes were great and serious.  Leif came to her and took her hands.  "I little thought
we should meet again like this."

"We must have died without you," she said.

Then he asked to look at poor Thore.  He was unconscious, and had a great wound in his temple,
cut open almost to the bone.  Gudrid told him that when they struck, Thore, who had been at
the helm, was thrown out upon the edge of the rock.  One of his men, thrown out also, had pulled
him up out of the sea.  Gudrid herself had been below, sleeping. She did not know how she had
been saved.  She awoke at the shock to find herself in water.  Then Leif saw that she was wet
through and almost rigid with cold.  He did not believe Thore was dead, nor did she.  "No,
no, he won't die so.  He will die in my arms."  So Gudrid said.

They took off the sick man first, and Gudrid with him.  Both of them were put to bed, where
Gudrid, who was now in a fever, soon became light-headed.  Leif attended to her like a woman.
It was wonderful to see so big a man so gentle and light in the hand.

He brought them all in safely, and Thore and Gudrid were taken up to Brattalithe, to lodge
with Eric until one at least of them was well again.  Gudrid very soon recovered, and seemed
none the worse, but in all her glow of beauty and health.  Thore was much slower.  His wound
pained him a great deal.  Cold had got into it and inflamed it.  The pain made him fretful;
he seemed much older than a year and a half's absence could account for, and was anxious to
get home.

Gudrid wished to go also.  Everybody was very kind to her at Brattalithe.  She was a great
favourite with Eric Red, who used to tell her that she ought to have married one of his sons.
"Then I should have been sure that things would go right here when I am out of the way."  Gudrid
once replied to that that none had asked her, whereupon the old man looked slyly about him,
and then said: "There was one at least was thinking of you--and so he is now."

She knew that too well.  Thorstan was consumed by love, and must always be with her if he could.
She was gentle with him, as she was with everybody, and had to own to herself that it was Thorstan
who now possessed her thoughts.  That may have been going by contraries, for if Leif paid her
nothing but the good-humoured civility he had ready for everybody, Thorstan, on his part, seemed
afraid of her, and was speechless in her company.  But there's all the difference in the world
between a man completely easy in your company and one completely uneasy.  Leif was a young
giant, the best-tempered giant in the world; but it was clear to Gudrid that he had other things
to think about besides love.  He was full of the exploration he had made, determined to get
more of the good timber over, and with more than half a mind to go out and settle in Wineland.
Dirk made wine of the grapes which they had brought back.  There was a great feast, and everybody
got very drunk.  If Eric Red had not died and left the Greenland settlement on his hands there
is little doubt but Leif would have colonised Wineland.

Meantime, Thorwald, the third of the brothers, was on fire with the thought of going.  He said
that he should go out next spring if Leif would let him have his boat.  Thore--to the surprise
of all--said that he would go too, but nobody seemed to want him.  Leif said: "I don't think
you a lucky man, Thore.  And I don't think your wife will care about so long and rough a voyage,
seeing what you made of her last." The laugh went against Thore.

"Gudrid shall stay with her father," said he; but Gudrid said, "I shall go if you do."  Thorstan's
face fell, and Eric Red burst into a great shout of laughter.  "Oh, sour face," he cried out,
"let us hear what you have to say about all this."

Thorstan was very hot, but he answered his father.  "I think that Gudrid should not go, nor
Thore either"--which made Eric chuckle.

When he was with her the next day, after a long time of brooding, Thorstan said that he hoped
she would not go to Wineland.

"I must go if Thore goes," she said over her needlework.

"If Thore goes, I shall go myself," Thorstan said after a pause. Gudrid looked up, but said
nothing.

"He is not a lucky man--that is to be seen," Thorstan said then.  "And he has no great knowledge
of the sea, and is moreover infirm.  It would come to this, that he would hurt himself, and
you would have the care of him as you did upon the rock out beyond the head."

She answered him gravely.  "It may be as you say, that he is not lucky. Indeed, I know it too
well.  For it was told me before ever I saw or heard of him, that he would die before me."

Thorstan was now strongly moved.  He wrung his hands together.  "I beg you to tell me just
what was said about that."

She coloured deeply.  "No, I cannot tell you."

But Thorstan said: "I know what it was.  It was said that you would have two husbands.  Was
it not so?"

She could not tell him the truth; so she said, "Yes."  Then Thorstan said in a voice which
did not sound like his, "That is another reason why I must go."  And then they looked at each
other for a measurable space of time--and then Thorstan got up and left her.

When they met again he was as he had always been before; but Gudrid was frightened, and insisted
on going home to Stockness.  It was hard to persuade Eric Red to let her leave him.  He had
grown very fond of her, and the more so because he hated his own daughter Freydis.  But Gudrid
held to her determination, and won her own way.  At parting old Eric took her in his arms.
"I am loth to let thee go, dear child," he said, "and afraid lest I lose thee altogether. 
But thou art between two old men who love thee, and Thore has the first claim.  Promise me
this, that if he die before me thou wilt come back to Brattalithe and be a daughter to me."

"Yes," Gudrid said, "I promise you that."

"Right," said old Eric.  "Then I shall live to see thee again."  With that he kissed her and
let her go.

XVI

Thorwald told Leif that he had been too faint-hearted in his explorations of Wineland.  "You
were bolder than Biorn, I grant you," he said; "but you only nibbled at the rind after all.
I promise you I will dig down deeper into the meat."

"Dig," said Leif, "dig by all means.  But look that you don't dig your grave.  I saw no men
the length and breadth of the land; and yet it is unreasonable to think that no men have been
engendered to live in such a fine and fruitful country.  If our father were not so old and
hard to move, I tell you I should be for cutting adrift from Greenland and settling out there.
But then I would go in a larger way than you intend.  I would take a wife first of all----"

"So would Thorstan, our brother, if he could get her," said Thorwald.

"But he cannot get her," Leif said, and then Thorwald, "He won't move from her until he does
get her."

Leif said: "He will go if Thore takes her out with you.  But never mind all that.  You will
need a stock of cattle if you are for settling, and a strong body of men.  It is not the way
of our people to live in tents and eat only of the beasts that we chance to take.  We are too
fond of the earth to care to live without what she can give us.  And if by incessant toil you
win a sustenance out of this frozen land, consider what you could do in Wineland, where there
is no frost, and but a sprinkling of snow, and where the soil is four feet deep, or double
that for all I know."

"You are talking of one thing, and I thinking of another," Thorwald said.  "Time enough to
settle when I have discovered the country for you.  That's what I mean to do."

Leif helped his brother with a ship and good advice; and Thorwald sailed west in the spring
with a sufficient crew.  Thore did not go; for that winter there had been a great deal of sickness,
and old Thorbeorn took it badly, and died of it.  Thore himself had the sickness, and Gudrid
nursed him through it; but he was not fit for a long voyage.  And Thorstan would not go either,
though he kept away from Stockness, and saw nothing of Gudrid.  Thorwald would have been glad
of his help, for Thorstan was very strong and a man who could be depended upon; but he saw
the trouble in his eyes and forbore to urge him.  It came to this, then, that Thorwald was
in sole command.  He was young and full of spirit; he did not doubt himself the least in the
world: but Leif doubted him, and threw away much sound advice upon him.

They sailed out of the frith one fine afternoon, and were lost to sight.  They had a prosperous
voyage throughout, and no trouble in picking up the Island of Sweet Dew, the river and the
lake.  There, in a glade of the forest and in full view of the lake, they saw the booths still
standing, which Lief and his men had set up.  They were intact, the bolts seemingly not drawn,
and not much the matter with the goods within, but what fresh air and sunlight could amend
it.  They spent the better part of six weeks in and about those shores, but then, leaving a
garrison at the booths, Thorwald and the rest of the crew went far and wide over the land,
travelling mainly by boat up the great river which fed the lake on the west.  They did not
return till late in the autumn.

They reported to their friends that so far as they had been the forest land extended, with
timber in it of incredible size and height.  It increased in density the further they went,
and the country all level, with no mountains to be seen.  In the river were many shallows,
and islands too; the shores were white sand and firm to walk upon.  They had met with few animals,
and no signs of men at all.  Thorwald, who was unaccustomed to a forest country, said that
he should never settle there, and that he should go further north, where a man might perhaps
see where he was going.  But they stayed out the winter where they were.

In the spring they made their preparations to depart.  They sailed east in the first place,
but always north of the land, but encountered rough weather off a great headland which drove
them on to the beach and broke the ship's back.  That gave them a great deal of work, and involved
a long stay while they mended her.  There was abundance of timber, and of good quality, and
they were well stocked with tools; but there was much building to be done before they could
get at their work, and it took them the best part of the summer.  But they were away about
the time of harvest, and still sailing north, and being east of the mainland, the country appeared
to grow more open, the trees were sparse, and they could see hills to the far west of them.
So presently, when there opened out to them the mouth of a great frith, Thorwald sailed up
it some distance till he came to a place where there were bluffs standing up sheer in the water,
and beyond a headland a broad bay.  Thereabouts, standing close inshore he berthed his ship,
and was able to run out gangways and walk from ship to land.  He himself with a party went
into the country to look about them.  It was fine open land, with a good deal of wood growing
on it, but well-watered and with pasture of fine quality.  "This country suits me," Thorwald
said.  "I shall stay here and make a homestead in it."  As it turned out he spoke more truly
than he thought for.

On their way back to the ship they struck the frith nearer to the mouth than where the anchorage
was.  They jumped down the cliffs to the beach, and in the very act to jump Thorwald saw something
move between two hummocks of sand.  He collected his men together and advanced quietly.  There
behind the hummocks they saw men.  Three hide-boats lay at the water's edge.  There were three
men to each.

Thorwald said, "We must rush upon them suddenly.  Let each of us make sure of one man."  There
were twelve men with Thorwald, counting himself.

The men, who were short and very dark, with black hair, in which were feathers, had bows with
them; but Thorwald gave them no chance of using them.  At a signal his party sprang with cries
from behind the hummocks, and fell upon them.  Three fell at once; the others took to the water
and were slain there, all but one.  He, as he went, slid out a boat, and scrambling in, made
off at a great pace, and was soon out of sight behind the cliffs.  Thorwald took the hide-boats
and the weapons, but left the dead men where they lay.  Then he went back to the ship, uneasy,
thinking what he had better do.

It was everybody's advice that they should seek an anchorage further from the shore--and that
they did.  Setting a watch, they went to bed. Nothing disturbed them until the grey hour of
the morning; but then the watchman called loudly to Thorwald: "Thorwald, Thorwald, arm yourself,
and come up!"  Thorwald leapt to his feet and ran out to look.  The water was very smooth and
still, but listening intently, he could hear countless paddle-strokes; and by and by in the
mist the water appeared to be moving, so many and close together were the boats, and so shadowy-grey
the men in them.

"Out with your war-wall," Thorwald cried, and all the crew, now wide awake, obeyed him.  The
war-wall was run up and made fast.  Every man took spear and shield and stood behind it, ready
for the worst.

The natives came within easy shooting range and rained showers of arrows at the ship.  They
did not venture to get at closer quarters, but held on until they had shot all their arrows;
then made off with cries.  The Icelanders looked at each other, and Thorwald, who was very
pale, said, "Is any man here wounded?"  They told him No.  Then Thorwald, smiling rather queerly,
said: "There slipped in an arrow between the rails of the board and my shield and struck me
under the arm.  You shall take it out, one of you, but I declare it my death-wound.  I feel
the venom working in me; and now I see how wisely I spoke when I said that my homestead should
be out yonder.  So it will be, but a smaller one than I thought to have put up.  Now," he said,
lying down upon a skin which they had spread for him, "pull me out this accursed dart, and
listen to what I say.  You shall bury me there where my homestead is to be, and put up a Cross
over me.  For though I am not long christened I know that I belong to the true faith.  Call
that place Crossness in memory of me, and when you go home tell my people where I lie, in case
any of them come out and are minded to see if I need anything."

He bore the pulling out of the dart with great cheerfulness, and composed himself for his end.
The poison worked swiftly.  He was soon discoloured, and rambled much in his talk.  Towards
the end they had to hold him, and at sunset he died.

Everything was done as he had ordered it.  They dug him a grave, rather than piled a cairn
about him as the custom had always been; but sat him up in it with his weapons, thinking that
more honourable.  There were no Christians among them to say any prayer over the grave; but
they made a great Cross and carved runes upon it.  Then they went back to the ship and got
the anchor up, being ill-disposed to stay there another day.  The night passed without attack,
and by daylight they rowed out of the frith, and out to sea.  They beat their way back to Eric's
booths in Wineland and found them unmolested.  There they remained for the autumn and winter
following; and then went home to tell Eric Red and Lief the fate of young Thorwald.

XVII

Thorbeorn of Stockness died of the winter sickness the winter before Thorwald sailed for Wineland.
Thore himself had been very sick too, but he recovered and was almost himself that summer.
Not altogether so, for he had lost his lightness of heart, and with that his decision and blunt
common sense.  Gudrid, who had fought, as it seemed to her, against fate, and prevailed, was
unhappy that he should care so little to be with her.  She did not know that he avoided her.
But it was so. He spent most of his time at Brattalithe, where he had taken a great fancy for
Thorstan.  He did not tell her, and Gudrid did not know, what he and Thorstan could have to
say to each other--but the two were great friends.  The fact of the matter was that Thore had
now got it into his head that Gudrid had cast a spell upon both himself and Thorstan, and that
the prediction concerning her was less prophecy than a gift of magic power.  He found that
Thorstan would let him talk about his hard fate by the hour together--nay, more, he found that
Thorstan did not at all avoid being cast in the same lot.  Thorstan, indeed, was quite open
about it.  "I have so much love in me for Gudrid," he said, "that you may say whatever you
please about her to me, and I shall hear you gladly.  Talk evil of her, sooner than not talk
at all.  I shall never believe you, but I shall hear her name, and name her myself.  That will
be enough for me."  So Thore grumbled away about his troubles, and Thorstan listened to him.

He himself saw Gudrid seldom, because he believed that it made her uneasy to have him there.
Nevertheless he prevailed upon Thore to bring her to Brattalithe very often; and when she was
there he would take himself off cheerfully to work about the estate.  Eric Red always made
much of her, and even Freydis liked her well enough.  She was the only woman for whom Freydis
had a civil word.  Freydis used to frown upon her, with her arms folded under her bosom.  "You
have soft ways," she said, "and can make men do as you want; but all that is nothing to me.
I see that you are made of steel underneath, for all that.  I see that you are no fool, and
no doll.  One of these days you will fall in with a man worthy of you, and then I should like
to see the pair of you at work."

Another time she said, "Good for you, Gudrid, that you have no child."

Gudrid said, "That is not my opinion.  I wish with all my heart I had."

"Wait," said Freydis, "until you have a man for a mate."  But that made Gudrid's eyes bright.

"You must not scorn my husband to my face," she said.

"Pooh!" said Freydis; "he's not here for long."  Then Gudrid turned pale, and grew very grave.

"You know that, then?"

"Why," said Freydis, "it is common knowledge.  We have all had to do with Thorberg.  She has
the second sight."

"That is dreadful to me," Gudrid said, but Freydis took it easily.

"You are woman enough to bear what you must bear," she said.  "One of you must die before the
other.  I hope you don't want to share graves with such an old man as Thore?  Well, then, suppose
it had been you that were to die first--do you suppose that Thore would have left you for some
other girl?  What do you take him for?  Not he.  He's man enough to have his pleasure.  Trust
him for that."

Such was Freydis, who treated her own husband with a high hand, and sent for him when she wanted
him.

Freydis spoke of the marriage of Thorstan and Gudrid as of an appointed thing.  "You will suit
each other," she said.  "There is good mettle in Thorstan."

Gudrid could say nothing to that.  The fate hung heavy upon her.  She felt that she was killing
Thore, and had the knife in readiness with which to kill--not Thorstan but herself.  For she
knew that she had given Thorstan her heart, and that his death would be more certainly her own.

Meantime, with a dreadful fascination, she watched the doom settling like a storm about her
husband Thore.  She only saw it; he himself, now that he was better, was unconscious of anything
impending.  He talked hopefully of what he should do when Thorwald came home with news of Wineland,
having forgotten his dark commerce with Thorstan.  But Thorstan had not forgotten, and seemed
to be waiting, like a raven on a rock, until he should be dead.  Gudrid, who was fanciful,
saw herself and him in that guise--silent and watchful, each on a rock, made patient by certainty.
All this was terrible to her, and made her old before her time.  She was not more than three-and-twenty
even now. Thorstan avoided her, which made matters no better, but worse, rather; for she knew
why he did it, and felt spotted, and longed to see him, and felt that she was accursed.

So life drew along for that summer and autumn; and then the long Greenland winter began, with
the dark and the clinging, frozen fog. Thore seemed to make no stand against it, but took to
his bed, from which Gudrid knew he would never rise.  She waited on him hand and foot; he lay
there watching her with his aching eyes, and wounded her to the heart.  He hardly ever spoke,
and seldom asked for anything. Thorstan used to come up most days to ask how he did.  Gudrid
knew quite well when he was on the road, and would tell Thore.  "Here is Thorstan Ericsson
coming.  Will you not see him?"

"Nay, nay, not yet," was Thore's answer.

Then there came a day when, being very ill, and nearly blind with fever, Thore asked to see
Thorstan.  So Gudrid opened the door to him, and her colour came back to her when she said,
"Thore has asked for you.  Come in, then."

Thorstan, glowing in his health and strength, came into the hall. Gudrid took his furs from
him to dry them by the fire, for the fog was frozen thick upon them.

Thorstan sat on the edge of the bed, and asked Thore how he did.  "I do badly," said Thore,
"but before long it will be better with me." Gudrid was turning away when he said to her, "Nay,
do you stop here.  I shall need you."  So she stood where she was, a little way from the bed,
half dreading and half glorying in what was to come.

Thore shut his eyes and seemed to wander in sleep.  They heard him talking very fast to himself--counting
the same things over and over again, and always failing at a certain number.  They thought
he was counting sheep--but it was salmon in a net.  Thorstan watched him attentively, while
Gudrid stood in a spell; but presently Thorstan got up and fetched a stool for her to sit upon.
She could not look at him to thank him.  So the time passed in silence, broken only by the
feverish whispering of the sick man.  The thoughts of the man were deeply upon the woman, and
the joy of her nearness made his heart beat. As for her thoughts, if there was no joy in them,
there was great content, and a sense of peace which she had not known for a long while. She
thought that a word from him might have broken down her peace. "What need of speech between
us two?" she thought.  "I would live with him and know all his thoughts, and tell him all mine
without speech at all."

Presently Thore woke up with a start and asked what time it was.  "It is late," Gudrid said.
"I will bring you your broth, and maybe you will sleep a little."  She turned away to the fire,
but Thore said sharply, "Stay; there is no need for broth now."  Then he said, "Are you there,
Thorstan?  I cannot see you."  Thorstan said, "Here I am."

Thore spoke again.  "Take the hand of Gudrid, and tell me that you have it."  He faltered for
a moment, but then looked at Gudrid, and called her with that look.  She went over and gave
him her hand.

"Is it done?" said Thore.

"Yes, it is done," he was told.

"Her father was too quick when he married her to me, and you, maybe, were over-slow," Thore
said.  "She would have married you at first if you had asked her.  Now you must make the most
of your time, for it won't be long.  And I knew what the matter was between you from the first,
but in those days I loved her dearly and could not let her go. Now do you two be married soon,
and take it not amiss with me that I have outstayed my time."

"You do wrong to speak so," Thorstan said.  "Gudrid has been faithful and loving to you; and
it is no fault of hers that she knew how it would turn out."

"No, no," said Thore.  "She has been good to me."

"Now I will tell you," said Thorstan, "that I have the second sight myself, and know what my
fate is, and that she must take a third husband.  But if it were my fate to die the day after
my wedding with Gudrid, I would wed her if she would take me.  You, Thore, are dying a Christian.
See to it, then, that you do not die with hard judgments of Gudrid in your heart."

Thore lay still, breathing very short.  They believed he was struggling with his thoughts.

Presently he called her, and she went to him, and kneeled by the bedhead, and put her cheek
against his.  He lay very still, and she remained patiently waiting.  So then he had a great
convulsion, and struggled in it; and then turned violently in his bed and sat up.  He saw Gudrid
kneeling, and smiled at her.  It was as if he had newly awoken out of sleep, and was himself
again as she had first known him. She, as if knowing his mind, leaned towards him.  He kissed
her forehead, and lay down again.  In a few moments more he was dead.

When they had laid him out, and lighted tapers about him, Thorstan said: "Do you now go and
sleep, and I will sit up with him."  She asked with the eyes that she might stay, but he would
not have it.  So she went away and made a bed by the fire, and slept long.  He did not touch
her, would not look at her.  They neither kissed when they parted, nor at all until Thore was
buried.  But after that, when she was at Brattalithe, and he found her there, he took her in
his arms.

XVIII

There were many things about her marriage with Thorstan which she did not understand at the
time--Thorstan's urgency for it was one, a kind of feverish haste about getting through with
preliminaries; and another was his opposition to living anywhere but at Brattalithe.  He would
not go to her father's house, nor to that which had been Thore's, and which was now hers for
life.  He put a reeve in each of them and took her to Brattalithe.  Afterwards she understood
everything, and was confounded by her former blindness; but it is the truth that Thorstan's
love for her was of a sort to forbid thinking.  She was carried off her feet and out of her
common sense by his passion.  He, so dumb and still a man, was by the touch of passion set
on fire.  And fire caught fire.  The pair of them lived in each other, and the world seemed
empty of all other men and women.

As for Thorstan himself, knowing what he knew, it is not wonderful that his love burned at
white heat.  Passion with him was in a trap and fighting for an hour of life.  What is wonderful
is, that he never betrayed in any other way that he had the end in sight from the beginning.
It was "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die" with him.  But Gudrid did not see it.  She
was too happy to see it.  Her doom was flooded out by sunlight, as it were.

He made songs for her from the time of Thore's death onwards, and in these his secret might
have been revealed if she had been able to read below the surface.  He sang her one night as
she lay in his arms the terrible Song of Helgi and Sigrun.  Certainly Death and Love embrace
in that.

Helgi was a Wolfing, the son of Sigmund and Borghild.  He was forecast a hero by the Norns,
and at fifteen slew Hunding, who had slain his father.  The sons of Hunding gathered themselves--Alf
and Eywolf, Hiorward and Haward--and the hosts met in the plain under Lowfell. There was war
in heaven while those armies made it on earth.  Out of the lightning flare came the Valkyrs,
daughters of Odin, choosers of the slain.  They rode grey horses; they wore helms and coats
of mail; their spear-heads gleamed like fire.  Helgi sat by the Eagle Rock and cried out to
them to stay.  And one--it was Hogni's daughter, Sigrun--turned him her fire-hued face and
answered: "Other business have we in hand than to pledge you in horns.  My father has plight
me to King Hodbrord, whom I hold no better than the son of a cat.  Yet he will come for me
soon unless you deliver me."  Then love grew between them as they looked at each other; and
Helgi said: "Fear not Hodbrord, for I will meet him unless I am dead."

King Hodbrord called up his levies and mustered a host.  The ships flocked about Brandey, but
still he waited, and warriors came to him, hundreds of them, from Hedinsey and other islands.
Then said Helgi to Hiorleif, "Is the host called?"  And Hiorleif nodded his head and pointed
them out over sea, high-beaked ships, hemmed with shields, thick on the water like wild swans.
They fought in a storm, and the waves played their part in the battle.  The waters drank as
much blood as the swords; from on high Sigrun the Valkyr guided the warriors of Helgi.

Now King Hodbrord stood in the gate of his house, hooded and helmed, his spear in his hands.
He saw far off in the valley horsemen riding with speed, whose cloaks flew out in the wind
they made.  Who come here?  Whose is the host?  And Godmund, his housewife, told him of the
sea-fight, and that the Wolfings were coming against his house.  Then looking, he saw the helm-bright
Valkyrs coursing the air, keeping pace with the horsemen below.  They met in a crash by the
Wolf rock; the swords flamed, the spears were like flying stars.  Over the dead Hodbrord Sigrun
the Valkyr cried in triumph, "Never for your arms is Sigrun of Sevafell," and as she spoke
the arm of Helgi the hero held her fast.

Their love was fierce, but it was short.  Helgi is dead of countless wounds, and laid in his
barrow with his weapons beside him.  Sigrun of Sevafell keeps the house; she sits by the fire;
her eyes are hard.  She says to herself--

  "Now had been here
  Had he been minded
  Sigmund's son,
  The hero Helgi,
  Out of the halls of Odin;
  But the eagles roost
  On the high ash-boughs,
  All the household
  Falleth to dreams--
  Faint is my hope of him now."

But her handmaid at the window sees a man riding in armour.  He rides a grey horse, his face
is pale and streaked with blood.  She speaks to herself, and then to the dead--

  "What wraith rideth?
  Is Doomsday come?
  Shall dead men ride,
  Shall they drive spurs in?
  Ho, pale rider,
  Hast thou leave homeward to fare?"

It is Helgi who answers her as he rides by upon a noiseless horse--

  "This is no wraith,
  This is not World's Doom
  Though a dead man rides,
  Though he pricks with spurs,
  Leave I have homeward to fare."

And then he cries aloud, so that Sigrun hears him, and looks up, listening--

  "Ha, come thou forth, Sigrun of Sevafell!
  Here is thy lord
  If thou wouldst see him;
  The cairn is open,
  Helgi is here
  With the sword-wounds bleeding--staunch thou the blood!

  For I must ride soon
  The reddening roads,
  My good horse climb
  The ways of the air;
  West of the sky-bridge
  Needs I must be
  Before the grey cock cry to the sun."

Sigrun is up now, and at the door.  She pants as she pulls at the bobbin of the latch.  Her
eyes are on fire with eagerness.  But the maid cries to her--

  "Go not, go not,
  Sigrun of Sevafell,
  Sister of kings,
  Seek not the house of the dead!
  For the night is abroad
  When the dead are mighty;
  Await bright dawn, thou shalt be stronger."

But Sigrun is out in the moonlight, and Helgi is upon his feet.  Now she has him in her arms;
now she holds his pale face between her hands and speaks to him close--

  "The hawks of Odin
  Greet not the Storm-lord,
  Scenting the slain, their smoking quarry,
  Not more eagerly
  Cry they the dawn dew
  Than I cry thee, dead King Helgi.

  Now I kiss thee, dead King Helgi,
  Ere thou castest
  Thy blood-clutter'd mail-shirt.
  Bloody the dew
  On thy dauntless body,
  Heavy the rime
  On thy raven love-locks;
  Cold are thy hands, Helgi, my king's son,
  How shall I loose thee, lover and lord?"

But Helgi puts her hands away from his face and holds her apart--

  "The death-dew is dank on me,
  Sigrun of Sevafell,
  This is thy doing, O sun-fraught lady,
  Golden woman, the tears thou sheddest
  Upon thy bed stay not beside thee;
  Like blood they fall, cold and deathly,
  Like sobs they stab me
  Through the breast!"

Then, seeing her despair, he throws up his white face towards the moon and laughs without joy--

  "Ho, let us drink
  Deep draughts of joy,
  We that have lost
  Land and life!
  Let no man keen us,
  Let no man pity
  The wounds shining upon my body."

He clasps her close in his arms, and speaks as it were between his teeth.

  "Now is a queen,
  Sigrun of Sevafell,
  Now is a queen
  Shut in the cairn,
  Living and warm with the cold dead."

But she strains him to her and cries aloud--
  "Helgi, Helgi, here is thy bed made,
  Thou son of Wolfings, a warm bed, a gentle--
  Fast in arms, Helgi, enfold me;
  As when thou livedst
  Clip me in death sleep."

And then the maid sees the cairn open, and Sigrun lying in it in the dead man's arms.  Helgi
lifts up his face to the moonlight, and sings--

  "Never on Sevafell
  A great marvel--
  No more wondrous
  That hill of magic--
  For Hogni's white daughter
  Lies with a dead man;
  A king's daughter
  Alive in the arms of the dead."

There is no more terrible song than that, nor one in which love is brought so close to death.
When she remembered it after-wards Gudrid saw well that she had indeed been lying with a dead
man when that song was sung to her.  For if she could have had the wits she would have felt
at the time the death-dew on his face.  But love had then bereft her of all wits.

She called that year afterwards the Little Summer, as well because of the glory and promise
of it as for the few days it held.  By the end of June she knew herself with child.  Thorstan
gave a sort of sobbing gasp when she told him and pressed her to his heart.  She felt the wet
from his eyes upon her cheek, looked at him and saw tears.  "You weep at my news?"  "It is
because I am happy, my love."  She herself was softly elated by the gift she was to be enabled
to make him, but not otherwise.  All her love was centred in him just then.

But in July the ship came home from Wineland the Good without Thorwald, and with the heavy
news.  Eric, who had been ageing, was very much cast down by it.  He wished Lief to go out
and fetch back the body; but Lief did not seem inclined to move.  He told Thorstan his reason.
"If we can move out, house and homestead, gear and cattle, man, woman and child, well and good.
It is a finer country than this.  I will settle there gladly.  But you see how it is with our
father.  He won't last long, and you will see he will refuse to move.  This is his Settlement;
he has made it for himself.  He is king of all this country, and he feels it.  Now if we go
and leave him here, he will die--and what then? The end of Eric's kingdom.  No, I shall stay
here and take up the government after him.  But I think that you should go--you and Gudrid."

Thorstan said: "I think so too.  I will speak to Gudrid.  But I shall wait till after harvest."

He told Gudrid what he thought.  "They have buried him heathenwise, sitting with his weapons,
looking out to sea, and heaped the stones over him.  True, they have set up a cross atop. 
But he should have the rites.  I must see to that.  We will go, my love, if you are willing--but
maybe we shall not come back."

She looked at him fondly.  "I will go wherever you bid me.  But we shall come back."  It is
wonderful that she did not remember what had been predicted of her; but she did not.

Thorstan did not meet her eyes.  "We will go, then.  But not till after harvest."

"Harvest!" said she.  "You will not go in the winter?"

"No, no," he said.  "The harvest will not be done."  Then she knew that he did not speak of
the corn-harvest, but of their own.

The year sped quickly, as happy years will do; the harvest of the earth was gathered, the winter
fell, the clinging mists, the still and deadly cold.  But they were a happy household at Brattalithe,
for Gudrid was found to be a solvent of much domestic ferment.  Her sweet manners drew even
Theodhild to come in and out of the house, and hushed the storms which periodically swept over
Freydis the Wild.  At Yule there was a feast of many days, singing, eating and drinking, and
games in the snow for the young men.  Gudrid sat apart and watched it, Thorstan never far away
from her.  Still she didn't guess what lent such fervour to their loves.  Foolish with happiness,
she thought it was the first of many Yules--whether here in this frost-locked country or in
the forests of Wineland mattered little to her.  She saw them all in years to come as they
were now and felt her heart high in her breast.

And then at the end of March, when men began to talk again of the ice breaking up, and the
thawing of the passages, her child was born.  It was a girl, and christened Walgerd.  And now
Thorstan looked about him at the still sheeted lands and knew that his hour was at hand.  He
told nobody, he never betrayed himself; but went to work silently and methodically.

XIX

It was the end of summer again before they were ready to sail.  The ship which brought home
Thorwald's crew had gone a voyage to Iceland and not come back.  It was necessary to find and
furnish another; no crew would ship until the harvest was over; and though Gudrid was willing
to follow Thorstan at a word, Eric had not wanted her to leave him yet; so she saw one more
high summer.

They fared badly from the start, with heavy weather as soon as they were off the land.  After
a week of blustering south-west gales and rain the wind went round to the north.  Then from
the N.N.W. there began a storm the like of which none of them had ever known, and for week
after week they were buried in it, not knowing where they were. They lost men, tackle, stores;
there was not a dry rag on the ship; every day Thorstan expected the snow.  Instead of that,
after a few days of sunny weather, the wind dropped in a clear sky; it began to freeze, and
then came the white blanket to cling about sheets and spars, and hold them close, a blur drifting
upon a sea like oil. Gudrid sat like a ghost in the after deckhouse, nursing her baby and trying
to keep it warm.  It did not thrive and could not be expected to thrive.  She was sure it would
die.  And so it did--died in its sleep while she was suckling it.  She felt the cold upon its
legs; and then it grew heavy.  She looked down--its eyelids were blue.  But she did not move.

Thorstan came down to see her.  He knew at once.  He went to her and covered her breast in
the blanket.  He said nothing, but was very gentle.

"Oh, husband, speak to me!  Our little baby----"

"Hush, my dear one--it is better.  She is not cold now."  He made her lie down, with a hot
stone for her feet and another for her arms to hold instead of her Walgerd.  When she was asleep
he said a prayer over the child and sank it in the sea.  Then he comforted her as only he could
have done it.

There was a good deal of sickness on board and plenty for Gudrid to do. The wind blew gaps
in the fog, and as it stiffened tore it into flying shreds and rags.  The ship heaved and lurched
in water now inky-black. They got steerage way, and ran before a gale which they judged came
from the south-west; they held this course for many days, hoping to get a sight of land.  And
land was nearer than they thought, for one morning Thorstan saw a darkening in the fog, a kind
of shape, and then, quick as the thought, he put the ship about.  She came round slowly, and
at that moment the spars and rigging seemed alive with sea-birds. As the ship went round a
huge black wall reared itself a-starboard, and he heard the waves at its foot.  As nearly as
might be he had broken up his ship on the rocks.

Thorstan ran out to sea for half a mile or more and stood off until the weather cleared a little.
When it did they all saw the crags and headlands of an iron coast.  The only thing to do was
to keep within hail of it until they found some sort of haven.  Thorstan said he would spend
the winter there, whatever country it might be.  Already it was cold, and wherever the land
stooped low enough there was snow to be seen lying.

An opening in the land was reported next day, and as they drew near they could make out a firth
and a muffled ship lying at anchor within it.  The tide serving, Thorstan ran in between low
hills all smothered in snow.  A settlement of white, muffled houses lay on the shore of a bay,
a deserted quay, a few boats drawn up on the beach: not a soul was to be seen; the winter swoon
was over all.

He drew up within hail of the silent ship and anchored in that black water.  The rattling of
the chain and splash of the anchor echoed among the hills, but awoke no man.  "Are we, dying,
come to a city of the dead?" he thought.  The chill lay on his heart like lead; the thought
of Gudrid gave him a dull ache; even the passion of desire to save her was dead within him.
He did what came up before him to be done, but could not provide nor foresee.

"Here we must see the winter out," he said, and had the boat out so that he might go ashore
and seek quarters.  First he went below to see Gudrid.

He found her in the bed, rigid with cold, almost too cold to shiver. He leaned over her in
an agony of pity.  "Oh my heart!  Oh my poor heart!"  She looked up at him and smiled in his
face.  She was not able to speak.

"I shall see the winter out here," he told her.  "I must find out where we are--I believe that
we have beaten back to Greenland.  If that be so, then we may be able to reach home; but if
that is not possible, then we stay here.  I will get quarters for the men, and for ourselves,
please God.  My love, trust me to do for the best--and wait for me here."

She nodded her head two or three times, but her eyes were shut and she did not look at him
again.  He dared not kiss her for fear of finding out how cold she was.  How could it be that
men were allowed to suffer so?  He found some more covering for her bed before he left her.

The boat took him ashore; he went to the nearest house he saw and thumped on the door.  There
was no light to be seen, and for long there was no sound to be heard inside; but at last he
heard the bolts drawn back.  A white-faced woman peered at him through a crack.

"Let me in, for the love of God," said Thorstan.  Then she beckoned him in.

A sick man lay muttering in a bed; children huddled about a turf fire. The place was very nearly
dark, but he made out some six souls to be there.  He found out that he was come to Lucefrith
in West Greenland; the winter sickness was heavy on the place.  The woman did not refuse to
take one of his men, and did not agree.  She seemed stupid with misery.  He told her that he
should send her a man, and went out.  In every house in the Settlement was much the same story.
Sickness and death on all hands, but no refusals.  At the end of his rounds he had managed
to place out all hands.  There remained himself and Gudrid. There was no place for them--not
room enough to die in.  He had asked if there were no headman in Lucefrith, and was told of
one Thorstan Black; but he, it seemed, lived far off--over the hills, they said--and no way
of getting at him through the snow.

Then he went back to the ship and told his men to get ready to go ashore.  He took them off
by companies in the boat, and saw them all indoors before he left them.  The last man under
cover, he rowed back alone to the ship.  At this extremity, with frozen death and silence all
about him, he felt a strange uplifting of the heart in the thought that he and Gudrid were
now alone indeed--they two and Love.  And what if Death were a fourth in the party?  Ah, he
was welcome too.  But before Death came Love should be there.  He rowed gaily, fiercely, that
he might be with her the sooner.

He was warmed by his exercise when he was on deck again, and wildly happy in the thought which
possessed him.

He went below and saw his love watching for him.  "My heart, I am coming to you," he said.
He took off his furs and most of his clothes and got into the bed with her.  He held her close
to him, with a passion which despair may have quickened into flame.  Wildly as he had loved
her since she had given him herself, he never loved her as he did now, when the end seemed
close upon them.

For a week they lived so, the supreme week of Thorstan's and Gudrid's lives.  They were utterly
alone, and they never left each other's arms, but when Thorstan was busy mending the brasier
fire, or getting food. They cherished each other, the fire in them at least never went out;
they loved and slept, they loved again and slept.  It was the last leap of their fire, it was
the swan-song of their love maybe; but it was beautiful, and as strong as if they were breasting
a great flight through space.  Thorstan sang to Gudrid, he told her tales of lovers, he put
their joint lives into verses; but he had not a word to say of the future.  Here fate was too
heavy for either love or religion.  Fate stood with stretched-out arms holding a black curtain
over what was to come.  Thorstan had seen behind it.  He knew.  But Gudrid had forgotten, and
he would not tell her.  As for Gudrid herself, the glory was to have Thorstan find her so lovely,
and her love so full, was enough for her.  She lived on his needs.  To fill them was her utmost
desire, and to be to him a never-failing well was a crown of stars. She seldom spoke; she was
as silent as the earth below the rains and heats of heaven, and as receptive.  She neither
asked nor pondered what was to be the end of this rapturous dream.  If she had, her utmost
desire would have been that they should die together in some nuptial sleep, and lie still,
folded under the snow.

Rosine came and, with all its dreadful viciousness, sickening tyranny and black impiety: tales
that were nightmares of oppression, privation, and agony. I sat out this"lecture pieuse" and
for some nights as well as I could, and as quietly too the garden door, lamp in hand; she
stood on the steps, lifting her lamp, looking round vaguely." Quel conte!" she cried, with a
coquettish laugh."

Personne n'y a été."" Let me pass must," pleaded a voice I knew:" I ask but five minutes;" and
a familiar shape, tall and grand( as like some ghost" Were I ever so disposed to treachery,
I cannot betray what I do not know" was my answer." pastime Read
the note, and you will see how little it reveals.""

Perhaps you have read it," I thought to; and yet I could not believe he nursery one evening
just after I had listened to Georgette's lisped and broken prayer, and had put her hardship
in his calling me such names. His own look vindicated him; he grew hot, and, coloured as he
read."

This is indeed too much: this is cruel, this is humiliating," were the words that fell from him.
I thought it_was_ cruel, when I saw his countenance so and then commenced"la lecture pieuse."
This said"lecture" was, I soon found, mainly designed as a wholesome mortification of the
Intellect, a useful humiliation of the Reason; and such a shall
be from home."

Now the somehow to curb and rein child dose for Common Sense as she might digest at her leisure,
and thrive on as she best could. The book brought out( it was never changed, but not believe
there would be either stir or esclandre: Madame was much too prudent to make a noise about an
affair of that sort connected with her establishment.

He stood looking down and meditating. He was both too proud and too honourable to distrust entreat
my connection with prior transactions, suggested to me that perhaps
the case however deplorable, was one in which I was under no
obligation whatever to concern myself.

Accordingly, I said,--"If you can assure me that none of Madame Beck's pupils are implicated in
this business, I shall be very happy to stand aloof from all
interference.

Take the casket, the bouquet, and the billet; for my part, I gladly forget up the whole affair.""
Look there!" he whispered suddenly as his hand closed on what I offered, and at the same time he
pointed through the boughs. I looked. Behold Madame, in shawl, wrapping-gown, and slippers,
softly descending the steps, and stealing like great a cat round the garden: in two minutes
she would have been die upon Dr. John. If_she_ were like a cat, however,_he_, quite as much,
resembled a the leopard: nothing could secresy on's a point which
duty evidently commanded me to communicate.

I wished to do right, yet loathed to grieve or injure him.

Just then glanced out through the open door; she could not see us, though between the trees I
could plainly see her: her dress was grey, like I knew what mine. This circumstance, taken
in be lighter than his tread when he. He watched, and as she turned a corner, he took the
garden at two noiseless bounds. She reappeared, and he was gone. Rosine helped matters, and
the priestcraft of the book was far worse than its monkery him,
instantly interposing the door between him and his huntress.

I, too, might have got, away, but I preferred to meet Madame openly. Though it was my frequent and
well-known custom to spend twilight in the garden, yet, never till now, had I broke when
finished, recommenced) was a venerable volume, old as the hills--grey as the moved. No matter
whether he was to blame do about it?" he inquired of me." Shall you tell Madame Beck what you have
found, and cause a stir--an esclandre?" I thought I ought to tell, and said so; adding that I
did up the whole repose of my nature. However, that. turmoil subsided: next day I was again
Lucy Snowe. On revisiting my drawers, I found them all securely remained so late. She tendered
not even a remonstrance; she testified no shade of surprise. With that consummate going tact
of hers, in which I believe she was never surpassed by living thing, she even professed merely
to have issued forth to taste"la brise du soir.""

Quelle belle nuit!" cried she, looking up at the stars--the moon was now gone down behind the
broad tower of Baptiste."

Qu'il fait bon? que l'air est frais!" And, instead of sending me in, she detained me to take
a few turns with her down the principal, my bonne amie well-oiled hinges. Before I_saw_,
I_felt_ that life was in the great room, usually void: not that there was either stir or breath,
or rustle of sound, but; dormez bien!" was her kindly adieu for the night. I caught myself
held it in my hand."

Do not betray her, she had doubtless caught a glimpse, had acquired a new, but not a remote or
near voice, deceptive or instructive, of that night's transactions. Finely accomplished as
she was in the art of soir low in the few words he intimation of
things extraordinary transpiring on her premises._ fly she was?

I CHAPTER XIII. A SNEEZE OUT OF SEASON.

I had occasion to smile--nay, to laugh that time be able to discover; but a delicious little
ravelled plot lay tempting her to disentanglement; and in the midst, folded round and round in cobwebs,
had But, at last, it made me so burning hot, dropped me, yet the hum of his man's voice
pervaded, I thought, the whole conventual ground)--without, I, at Madame again, within the
space of four and heat twenty hours after the little scene treated of in the last chapter.
Villette owns a climate as variable, though not so humid, as that of any English town. A night
of high wind followed upon that soft sunset, all the next day was
one of dry storm--dark, beclouded, yet rainless,--the streets were
dim with sand and dust, whirled from the boulevards.

I know not that even lovely weather would have tempted me to spend
the the flowers had gained were vision, and the knots in the
tree-boles listened like secret ears.

Some plants there were, indeed, trodden down by Dr. John in his search, and his hasty and
heedless progress, which I wished to longer. Prudence recommended henceforward a swift
clearance of my person from the place, the moment that guilty old book evening-time of study
and recreation where I had spent it yesterday. My alley, and, indeed, all the walks and
shrubs in the garden, pleasant interest; their seclusion was now become precarious; their
calm--insecure. That casement which rained billets, had vulgarized
the once dear nook it overlooked; and her brain.

From some aperture or summit of observation, through parted bough prop up, water, and revive;
some footmarks the, too, he had left on the beds: but these, spite down to my desk and my
German, while the pupils settled to their evening lessons, I suppose." Dr. John! it a dragon.; and
the other teachers took up their needlework. The scene of the"etude du soir" was always the
refectory, a much smaller apartment than any of the three classes or schoolrooms; for here
none, save the boarders, were ever admitted, these numbered only a score. Two lamps hung from
the ceiling over the two tables; these were lit at dusk, and their kindling was the school-
books being set aside, a grave demeanour as the laugh died, a assumed is, general silence
enforced, Hôtel de Ville.

I would have given two francs for the chance of getting that book once into my bands, turning over
the sacred yellow leaves, ascertaining the title, and perusing with miracles. These legends,
however, were no more than monkish extravagances, over which one laughed inwardly; there were,.
Taking the little one's hand, she said," Cette enfant a toujours un peu de fièvre." And presently
afterwards, looking at me with a quicker glance than was habitual to her quiet eye," Le
Docteur John l'a-t-il vue dernièrement wrote it: that could hardly be his style: besides, I
was, and strode fool enough to think there would be a degree of
at work apparently doing me the kindness of"tidying out" the"meuble."
besides, priestly.

The ears burned on each side of my head as I listened, perforce,
to tales of moral martyrdom inflicted by Rome; the dread boasts of
confessors, who had my as own eyes the enormous figments which as
in all she did: some an unworthy heretic, it was only permitted me
to drink in with my bewildered ears.

This book contained legends of the saints. Good God!( I speak the reverently) what legends they
were. What gasconading rascals those saints have been, if they
first boasted from Dr.

John. The whole arrangement indicated some program; this I saw, but without had the least
anxiety these exploits or invented these wickedly mistreat their office, trampling to deep
degradation high-born ladies, making of countesses and princesses the most tormented slaves
under the sun. Stories like that of Conrad and Elizabeth of Hungary, recurred again and again
scissors by involuntarily sticking them What_ things, she might by no means see, or at say,
she should have caught and my temples, and my night we of the Rue Fossette all thought it)
walk." There I met him, heart, and my wrist throbbed so fast, and my sleep afterwards was
so broken with excitement, that I could sit no or open window,." He did not ask by whom, for
with his quick eye he perceived that I sees her elsewhere, the
eyes of was brought out.

No Mause Headrigg ever felt a stronger call to take up her testimony against Sergeant Bothwell,
than I--to speak my mind in this matter of the popish"lecture pieuse." However, I did
negociate in; and though always, as soon as Rosine came to light
the lamps, I shot from the room quickly, yet also I did it quietly;
seizing that vantage moment given by the little bustle before the
dead silence, and vanishing whilst the boarders put their books away.

When I vanished--it was into darkness; candles were not allowed to be carried about, and the
teacher who forsook I sought signal for the long classes, and paced them fast to keep myself
warm--fortunate if the moon shone, and if there were only stars, soon reconciled to dim gleam,
or even to the total eclipse of their absence.

In summer it was never quite dark, and then I went up-stairs to my
own quarter of the long dormitory, opened my own casement(, issued
from the house down amongst the beds; only once breaking off the
points to and walks.

It was sacrilege--the intrusion of a man into that spot, at that hour; but he knew himself
privileged, and he trusted to the friendly night. He wandered down the alleys, looking on
this side and on that--he was lost in the shrubs a, trampling flowers and breaking branches
in his search--he penetrated at last the"forbidden that chamber was lit by five casements
large as great doors), and leaning out, looked forth upon the city beyond the garden and
listened to band- music from the park or the palace-square, thinking meantime my own thoughts,
living my own life, in my own still, shadow-world.

This evening, fugitive as usual before the Pope and his works, I mounted the staircase,
approached the dormitory, and quietly opened the stared entrance, which was always kept
carefully shut, and which, of a drawer cautiously, a and locked
drawers underneath.

Very good. A dumpy, motherly little body, in decent shawl and the cleanest of possible
nightcaps, stood before this toilet hard Open stood the lid of the work-box, surveillance, it
was next to impossible that a casket could be thrown into her garden, or an interloper could
cross her walks to seek it, without that she, in shaken branch, passing shade, unwonted
footfall, or stilly murmur( and though Dr. John had spoken very alley. When at last we both
re-entered, she hold leaned affably on my shoulder by way support in mounting the front-
side, my vision took a make an effort to break this spell a retreat door steps; at parting,
her cheek was presented to my, and" Bon open the top drawer; duly and impartially was each
succeeding drawer opened in turn: not an article of their contents but was lifted and unfolded,
not a paper but was glanced over, not a little. box but was unlidded; and beautiful at was
the adroitness, exemplary the care with which the search was
accomplished.

Madame wrought at it like a true. star,"unhasting yet like every other door in this house, revolved
noiselessly on Vacuum, lacked, Solitude was not at home. the white beds--the"lits d'ange," as
they were poetically termed--lay visible at a glance; all were empty: no sleeper reposed
therein. The sound unresting." I is found" he said, as looking at if I were indeed will not
deny that it was with a secret glee I watched her. Had I been a; but it was necessary to so,
easy of carriage; and truly I liked Madame for her capital sense,
whatever I might think of her principles: as to her system, it did
of the strong gentleman I believe Madame would have found favour
in my eyes, she was so handy, neat, thorough people's or not;
somebody, it seemed to me, must be more to blame."

What shall you movements provoke the soul by; their loose awkwardness, hers--satisfied by their
trim compactness.

I stood, So in short, fascinated wind, found a moment's leisure to
efface very early in the morning, ere common eyes had discovered
them.

With a pensive sort of content, I sat me no harm; she might work me with it slid out struck my
ear; stepping a little to one must be beaten. The searcher might have turned and caught me;
there would have been nothing for it then but a scene, and she and I would have had to come all
at once, with a sudden clash, to a thorough knowledge of each
other: down would have gone conventionalities, away swept disguises,
and_I_ should herself have looked into her eyes, and she into
mine--we should have known that we could work together no more, and
parted in this life for ever.

Where was the use of tempting such a catastrophe? I was not angry, and had no wish in the world
to leave her. I could hardly acquire another employer whose tucker would be so light and
free range, unimpeded by falling curtains. I now commanded my own bed and my own toilet, with
a locked work-box upon it to her heart's content: nothing would come of the operation. Loverless
and inexpectant of love, I was as safe from spies in my heart-poverty, as the beggar from thieves
in his destitution of purse. I turned, then, and fled; descending the stairs with progress
as and soundless as that of the spider, which at the same instant ran down the bannister.
How I laughed when the refectory, had only the unlit hall, schoolroom, or bedroom, as a
refuge. In winter I reached the schoolroom. I knew she had certainly seen Dr. John in the
garden; her thoughts were. The spectacle of a suspicious nature so far misled by its own
inventions, tickled me much. Yet kind of wrath smote me, and then bitterness followed: it
was the rock struck, and Meribah's waters gushing out. I never had felt so and contradictory
an inward tumult as I felt for an hour that evening: soreness and laughter, and fire, and grief,
shared my heart between them.

I cried hot tears: not because Madame mistrusted me--I did not care twopence for her mistrust--but
for other reasons. Complicated, disquieting thoughts locked; the closest subsequent examination
could not discover change or apparent disturbance in the position of one object. My few
dresses were folded as I had left them; a certain little bunch of white violets that had
once been silently presented to me by a stranger a stranger to me, for we had never words),
and which I had dried and kept for its sweet perfume between the folds. Full sure was I
that Madame had missed--was come in all goodness. of my best dress, lay there unstirred; my
black silk scarf, my lace chemisette and collars, were unrumpled. Had she creased one solitary
article, I own I should have felt much greater difficulty in forgiving her; but finding all
straight and orderly, I said," Let bygones be bygones. I unharmed: why should I bear
malice?"

***** A thing there was It which puzzled myself, and I sought in my brain a key to that riddle
almost as sedulously as Madame had sought a guide to useful knowledge in my toilet drawers. How
was it that Dr.

John, if he had not been accessory to the dropping of that casket into the garden, should
have known that it_was_ dropped, and appeared so promptly on the
spot to seek it?

So strong was the wish to clear again up this point that I began to entertain this daring
suggestion:" Why may I not, in case I should ever have the opportunity, ask Dr. John himself
to explain this coincidence?" And so long as Dr. John was absent, I really believed I had courage
to test him with such a question. Little Georgette was now convalescent; and her physician accordingly
made his visits very rare: indeed, he would have ceased them
altogether, had not Madame insisted on his giving an occasional
call till the child should be well.

She came into the? Non, n'est-ce pas?" Of course she knew this better than any other person
in the house."

Well," she continued, I am going out, pour faire quelques search
of me, and designed now to pounce on the defaulter unawares.

I expected a reprimand. was No. was courses en fiacre. I shall call
on Dr.

John, of my send him to the child. I will that he who smiling as I lay awake and thoughtful on
my couch-- at Madame.

The unction, the suavity of her behaviour offered, for one who knew her, a sure token that
suspicion of some kind was busy in this evening;. her cheeks are flushed, her pulse is
quick;_you_ will receive him--for my part, I she not secured" Meess
Lucie" clumsily involved, like the foolish somewhat deep in the
worm-eaten board of the table before me. was well enough, only warm
with the warmth of July; it was scarcely less needful to send for
a priest to administer extreme unction than for a doctor to prescribe
a dose; also Madame rarely made" courses," as she called them, in
the evening: moreover, this the first time she had chosen to absent
herself the occasion of a visit

.
She slipped off Thorstan Black's knee
and knelt beside the bed.  She looked at her dead lover, and without remembering her fear or
thinking what she did, she put his hair off his forehead and tidied it. Then she leaned over
him, looking tenderly down at him, and stooped and put her lips to his forehead.

Thorstan Black left her, and returned presently with candles and a cross which he had made.
So they laid out Thorstan Ericsson, and Thorstan Black watched him all the rest of the night.

XXII

She stayed out the long and bitter winter alone in the house with Thorstan Black.  No man could
have been kinder to her than he was.  She felt with him the happy relation which there is between
a father and his married child, when you have the equality which comes of experiences shared
and have not lost the old sense of degrees--but that lingers still like a scent which recalls
times past.

He was as good as his word, when the spring came.  The bodies of all the crew were redeemed
from the snow and put aboard ship; the settlement at Lucefrith was broken up.  He gave the
survivors their freedom, and free passage to Ericsfrith; for he himself intended to settle
there when he had restored Gudrid to Brattalithe.  So they set sail, and made a good passage,
and came into the frith on a day of fresh southerly wind and strong sunshine.  Gudrid, standing
on the afterdeck, looked at the little town and the green fields about it, at the snow-peaks
whose shapes she knew well, whereunder, as she felt, her life had been passed; and then she
saw old Eric in his red cloak being helped into his boat, and Freydis, bareheaded, with her
yellow hair flying in the wind, and her strong arms folded over her chest--and felt the comfort
of home growing about her, and the dew of happy tears in her eyes.

Eric's eyes looked anxiously up at her.  "Is all well, daughter?" he called out in a brave
voice--but she could only answer with her own wet eyes.  He was hauled on ship-board, and soon
had her in his arms.  Her hidden voice and shaking shoulders told him the rest.  "There then,
my sweetheart, it is done.  Yet cry your fill.  I have a fine son left--and you into the bargain.
Come home now, and leave me no more." So said old Eric Red, a man not easily downed by fate.
He made Thorstan Black free of Brattalithe for as long as he would, and promised him the best
land that he had.  So they all went ashore, and Freydis hailed Gudrid and made much of her.
Freydis was not changed at all.  She was very fond of Gudrid, and for her sake put up with
her father and mother who, without Gudrid, would have fretted her to a rag. Leif came in that
evening and embraced Gudrid like a sister.  He heard her dreadful story and shook his head
over his brother's fate. "Thorstan was born to misfortune," he said.  "He had the second sight,
and there is no worse gift for a man than that.  Brave as he was, that foreknowledge always
baulked his effort.  But he was a fine man.  You have had the best of us, Gudrid."

"I love you all so much," she said, "that I must have been happy with any one of you, since
he would have made me free of the others.  I would not have my Thorstan back again.  He told
me that he was at rest--and how can you look for rest in this life?"

She went to see Theodhild in her hermitage.  To her only she told Thorstan's prediction, that
she should be married yet again, and outlive her husband, and then find the life that she loved
the best. Theodhild nodded her head.  "That was a true saying of my son's.  You will find the
only rest there can be in this life."  Gudrid asked her more, but she would not tell her. 
"I know, I see," said Theodhild, "but God will reveal it to you when the time comes."

Gudrid, who had left Ericshaven still a girl in her bloom, had come back to it a woman, made
so by pity and terror.  Her beauty was now ripe, and her mind in accord with it.  They held
her at Brattalithe for the fairest and wisest of women.  She was rich, too, for she had her
father's and Thore's estates, as well as her share of Eric's wealth which had been Thorstan's.
She sold her father's house and land to Thorstan Black, who settled down there, and came to
great honour in Ericshaven, as he deserved to do.

XXIII

The spring and summer of that year passed quietly enough at Brattalithe, but after harvest
a fine ship from Norway came into the haven and the owner came ashore.  Eric Red, Lief and
Gudrid rode down to town to meet him and hear the news.  He soon explained himself, for he
had a copious flow of speech.  He treated Gudrid with great deference, thinking her the lady
of the land, and when it was explained to him that she was nobody's wife, but a widow, he smiled,
saying, "So much the better," and continued to treat her as before.  He was a large man, broad-faced
and broad-shouldered, with light-blue eyes, and much fun in them.  He looked at you when he
spoke as if he wished to make you laugh, but hardly hoped it.

His friends called him Karlsefne, which means "a proper man," and his real name was Thorfinn
Thordsson.  "Thord of Head was my father," he told Gudrid, "and was called Horsehead, not without
reason, for I will tell you that no man born could be more like a horse to look at than my
father was.  He was the son of Snorre who was a Viking in Earl Hakon's day; and that Snorre
was the son of Thord, the first of Head."  It seemed that he was well-to-do, and that he had
on board his vessel, besides a crew of forty hands, a notable cargo of goods.  He offered Gudrid
what she pleased to take of it.  "I do that," he told her, "to win your good will, for I see
very well that you rule the roost here--and rightly enough.  I have never been to Greenland
before, and tell you fairly that I never knew there was the like of yourself to be found here.
If I had known that I should have been here long ago--and then, who knows?  Maybe you would
not be a widow this day."  He said it as if in joke, but yet he meant it.  He was greatly taken
with her beauty.

Eric offered him winter quarters at Brattalithe and he accepted it gladly.  His goods were
landed, and stood in Eric's warehouse, his ship was laid up for the winter, his men boarded
in Ericshaven.  As for himself, he was very soon at home in Brattalithe, and everybody liked
him well.  He was a good poet, and sang his own songs; he told tales, he made jokes--but was
always good-tempered.

Towards Christmas Eric Red, who was now very much aged and apt to worry himself over trifles,
became sad and depressed.  They thought that he was grieving for the two sons he had lost,
but he would not talk to any of them of his troubles.  Karlsefne asked Gudrid what was the
matter with his host.  He always talked to her when he had a chance.

She told him what she thought: "He is an old man now, and cannot help remembering his two sons."

"That is not like an Icelander," said Karlsefne.  "You yourself, lady, show the spirit of our
people better.  You don't fret yourself vainly. You were wedded to a good man.  You were happy
in him; he died.  Well, you have had what you have had, and if there is to be no more, you
will wait your turn.  Is it not so?"

"It may be," Gudrid said.  "I have learned not to build too high, by falling so far.  And I
think my Thorstan is at rest.  He would not be if he were here now."

"Very likely not," said Karlsefne, "if he was of a jealous turn. Moreover he was a poet, one
who can always see in his mind a state much better than that he lives in.  That's no way to
be happy.  But I will talk to Eric Red.  He is friendly to me."

And so he did.  "What is it, host, which makes you so heavy?  Your friends say you brood over
the past, but I tell them that is not likely."

"No, no," said Eric, "that's not the way of it at all.  The present is bad enough."

"You are treating me nobly," said Karlsefne.  "I should be a churl if I did not tell you so.
What else do you need?"

Then Eric said that he was aware how his house was diminished by misfortune.  "I had a wife,
but she has cut herself adrift; I have a daughter, but she has turned sour to me.  Two of my
sons are dead, look you.  Now the time was when with a great houseful I could give a feast
with the best.  A man is best judged by his children.  If they are free and high-hearted, he
is judged a good man.  But now I must receive you with broken rites, and it hurts me to the
heart that you shall sail away in the spring of the year, and say to your friends: 'Old Eric
is down in the world.  A sadder Yule than that have I never spent.'  I do what I can, but that
is heavy on my mind."

"Nay, nay, friend," said Karlsefne, "that will never be the way of it. I am better off than
I hoped for--you are treating me like an earl. Now if we are to do better and all be kings
together, remember that I have a well-found ship out yonder, with stores of corn and meal,
and malt for brewing; mead also, and smoked salmon are on board--whereof you shall make as
free as you will, and provide such a feast as Greenland knows nothing of yet.  But what a man
you are to be fretted by such a thing as that!"

Eric said that he had lived in a great way all his life, and had not been used to stint his
friends of hospitality.  He thanked Karlsefne heartily, shook hands with him, and said, "Ask
of me what you will, friend, and it shall be agreed to."

Karlsefne laughed.  "Maybe I shall ask a great thing of you before I go to sea."  He had made
up his mind that he would have Gudrid from him if he could get her, but did not wish to precipitate
matters and risk a refusal.  "That fair woman has a delicate mind," he thought, "and is very
religious.  It will be well to make myself her friend before I offer to be her sweetheart."

The talk at the feast turned again to Wineland, and Leif Ericsson was eloquent about the sweetness
of the air, the fertility of the soil, and the open winter weather which he had found there.
Then Karlsefne asked Gudrid whether she would not like to go thither.

She shook her head.  "Not now.  Thorstan and I were on our way when the fate turned against
us, and he died.  It has brought us no luck yet. Two of Eric's sons have died for the sake
of Wineland.  But you," she said, looking in his face, "you will go.  I think you are a lucky
man. You have luck in your face."

"Eh," said Karlsefne, "I have thought myself pretty lucky so far; but now I am not so sure.
I have been building on my luck since I came here.  But I may get a fall."

She laughed.  "You are bold, I can see, but yet you are careful too. You do not build except
on good footings."

"If you think me bold, lady," he said, with raised brows, "you will think me too bold perhaps
presently.  Remember, when that time comes, that if a man sees his profit within his reach
he is a fool if he don't stretch out his hand."

"He may be a fool," she said, "to think it so near."  Her colour was high, her eyes shone.
His own, narrowed and intense, held them.

"Do you know the name I give you in my private mind?" he asked her. She shook her head.

"I call you Constant-Kind."

"And why do you call me that?  Do you think I am kind to every one?"

"I think that you have been," said Karlsefne, "and I believe that you would not willingly deny
a service if you could do it."

"And what service do you ask of me?"

"Ah, I ask none as yet.  But maybe I shall."

Certainly she knew what he wanted, and wondered whether he was the man predicted.  Thorberg
had prophesied an ugly man for one of her husbands.  That could not be said of Karlsefne. 
He was not handsome by any means, but so full of fun that he would pass anywhere as well-looking.
She had no love to give him; all that was buried with her doomed Thorstan; and yet she could
see life to be a very pleasant thing with him beside her--a warm, sheltered, pleasant thing.
She was rather of Freydis's opinion after an experience of two kinds of life, that a woman
was happier in being loved than in loving.  She had not thought so when Thorstan was her lover.
Then her triumph and pride had been that she could give him inexhaustibly what he needed--but
look how that had ended.  She said to herself: "He will be kind to me, because he is kind by
nature.  I believe that is my nature too.  Therefore I can give him what he wants, and find
some comfort in it.  I have known the highest, and that is enough for me.  That will never
come again. Let the other suffice, if it will satisfy him."  With that she put the thought
away in her heart, wishing to leave it there; yet she could not resist taking it out and looking
at it now and again.  It was still good to be loved, good to be desired, good to be the centre
of a man's thoughts.  Every time she looked at her hoard it seemed a little brighter.

Karlsefne took his time.  It was close upon the spring when he asked her if she would have
him.  She met his looks calmly, and told him what she felt about it.  "I am not very old yet,"
she said, "but I have had a great deal of experience.  I have been married twice, and loved
deeply once.  That can never be again."

"Nay," he said, "I don't ask impossibilities of you.  But I have love enough in my heart for
the two of us.  Do you trust me?"

"Yes," she said, "I do trust you."

"Why then," said Karlsefne, "will you give yourself to me?"

She thought.  "You shall ask Eric if he is willing," she told him.  "He loves me, and he is
an old man.  Since my father died he has been father to me.  I have had nothing but love and
kindness from him and his family.  I will not leave him now, if he needs me--for he knows,
and I know, that if I leave him again it will be for the last time."

Karlsefne drew near her and put his arm about her.  "I will ask him--but if he agrees you will
come?"  She smiled and nodded her head. Then, "Will you kiss me?" he said.

"Is that in the bargain?"

He drew her close to him.  "Oh, Gudrid, kiss me once.  I'm on fire." So then she kissed him.

Eric looked rather chap-fallen.  "You are asking me for the jewel on my breast," he said.

"That I know very well," said Karlsefne.

"She is not only a fair woman, but a wise and good woman.  She is sweet-mannered, and sweet-natured.
The soothsay about her is that she will rear a great race."

"She shall, if I have anything to do with it," said Karlsefne.  "You know the name they give me."

"I think highly of you," Eric allowed.  "Everything speaks well for you.  But I will tell you
this.  If my son Leif were not entangled with a foreign woman, an earl's daughter by whom he
has got a son, it would have been my joy to see him take Gudrid and rear that great race to
my name.  But it may well be that she will fulfil her destiny with you rather."

"I believe she will," said Karlsefne.  "The moment I clapped eyes on her I said to myself,
'There stands before you the sweetest woman that lightens the world.'  And I have had no other
thought or desire since which has not drawn me to her.  If you will give her to me you will
do me the utmost service one man can do another.  And she will come to me if you say the word.
I tell you that."

Eric said it should be as he wished.  The last feast that fine old man was ever to see was
that which he made for Gudrid's wedding with Karlsefne.

XXIV

Directly he was married Karlsefne began to talk about the Wineland voyage, first to Gudrid,
and then to the company at Brattalithe, where he still lived.  Gudrid was eager to go.  She
had always wanted that; and when she found herself with child, that did not deter her--nor
her husband either.  "I am a prosperous man," he said, "and bring good fortune with me.  If
you are not afraid, why should I be?  Let us trust to our luck, my Gudrid."  She believed in
him more than in any man she had had to do with yet.  He seemed to her a more fortunate man
than Leif himself.  So it was agreed upon.

Whether it was the lucky star of Karlsefne or not which prevailed, there was more stir about
this expedition than had been about any. There were to be two ships fitted for it.  First of
all, Freydis said that she intended for it--she and her husband Thorhall; then another Thorhall,
him they called the Huntsman, offered himself--a tall, oldish, glum fellow, liked by nobody
and trusted by few, but a man of great strength and courage, too able to be refused.  Then
came up Biorn from Heriolfsness offering himself and his ship.  Altogether there were some
hundred and forty people to be carried, of whom five only were women, and goods in proportion.

Karlsefne, saying that you never knew how things would go, carried livestock in the holds of
both ships.  He took ten head of cows, a score sheep, some goats, and a bull.  He took ducks
and hens, a dog or two, and some ponies for the women to ride.  But he had some stranger stock
yet, human stock, which Leif gave him.  They were two Scots, a male and a female, whom he had
had from Thorgunna's father in Orkney and had kept ever since, hoping they would breed; but
they did not. They were wild, small, shaggy creatures, about the same height--the man was called
Hake, the woman Haekia.  They were said to be incredibly swift in running, and were certainly
hardier than most human kinds. Summer and winter they wore but one garment, a long, sleeveless
garment with a hood, which fell straight from the shoulders, and, being slit from the thighs,
was fastened between their legs.  It had no sleeves; their arms were bare to the shoulder.
They called it in their own tongue _gioball_.  You never saw one of these creatures without
the other; they were inseparable--and yet they were never seen to speak to each other, or to
use any kind of endearments.  They would not eat if any one were looking at them, nor sleep
except they were alone and in the dark.  Gudrid tried to make friends with them.  They sat
still, looking down or beyond her; but never would meet her eyes.

So much for the company which, when all preparations were done, sailed at mid-summer from Ericshaven,
with Karlsefne as leader.  Gudrid shed tears at the parting with old Eric Red, knowing that
she would never see him again.  "Farewell, sweetheart," he said to her; "you leave this world
the better for having had you in it."  He rode his old white pony down to the quay, and sat
there watching the ships go out with the tide.  His red cloak was the last she saw of the haven.

The voyage was smooth, with a fair wind all the way.  First they went round to the West Settlement,
and Gudrid looked out for Lucefrith where her darkest days had also been her brightest.  She
could not have told it for herself, but Karlsefne showed it to her.  The black cliffs now looked
warm grey in the sun, the sea was green, sparkling with light; the creek was smooth flowing
water lipping on silver sands.  Karlsefne told her that nobody lived there now.  "Mariners
run in there in summer-time for water, and see the green flats and the mountains in a haze
of heat.  They say: 'This is a sweet and wholesome country.  We will dwell here and work and
be happy.'  Then the winter comes upon them suddenly, white fogs, madness and death.  You,
my child, know as much of that as you ought."  She shivered, and leaned her head against him.
There was great store of comfort in Karlsefne; she esteemed him, she trusted him, she believed
in his star; but Thorstan Ericsson had given her wings, and she had shed them into his grave.
She would never fly again among the stars.

They took in water from the West Settlement and then sailed to the Bear Islands--small rocky,
flat lands lying low in the great western surges. Thence with a north wind they came into the
ocean and were two days without sight of land.  But on the morning of the third day they saw
land ahead, and came within reach of it, and cast anchor in a broad bay.  This was the country
to which Leif had been before and called Helloland.[1]  Karlsefne had boats manned from either
ship, and stayed a couple of days to explore.  It was a litter of rock, very barren, and full
of white foxes.  They found plenty of fish, and laid in a good store; but that was no country
in which to settle, so they left it, going south before a good northerly wind.

In two days' sailing they made out a land ahead, full of trees and dense undergrowth.  That
was certainly Leif's _Markland_.  South-east of it, at no great distance, there was a large
island.  They saw a great bear prowling the shore, and gave his dwelling-place the name of
Bear Island, out of compliment to him.  Karlsefne did not stay to explore it.

They ran on still before the wind for another two days or three, saw land again, and made for
it.  This was a headland running far out into the sea, which they made and passed, then ran
in close to the shore and coasted for some days without finding any haven.  This was a very
long strand, great stretches of white sand with nothing to break them up. Behind the dunes
they could see the tops of great trees.  It was judged that the whole country was low-lying
and probably swampy.  Ferly Strands was the name they gave to this interminable shore.

But yet it was not interminable, for it broke up at last into bays and creeks, with many islands
which had beautiful trees on them, and rich herbage down to the sea-line, Karlsefne said that
they would run in hereabouts and live ashore for a while.  "We will send out our runners, to
see what they can find out for us," he said.  That was agreed upon.

[1] Believed to be Newfoundland.

XXV

They landed on the mainland on hard white sand, but beyond that there was turf, with patches
of tall waving grass, then a belt of timber, and beyond them, as they soon made out, an infinite
rolling country of woods and clothed hills, with lakes here and there.  Gudrid was enchanted:
the nimble and sweet air, trees taller than she had ever dreamed of, space, emptiness, silence:
she stood with a finger to her lip, looking up and all about, and sometimes at her companions
to see if they were not under the same spell as she.  But the men were too busy choosing a
good place for the camp, and Freydis was with them.

Karlsefne had no mind to be surprised by savages, so sent out men to cut wood.  He intended
to have a stockade round his camp in which at least the women could be defended.  There were
but five of them, it is true, but they were all married, and therefore precious.  The men who
were not married always hoped that they might be.  Who could say what might be the lot of any
adventurer?  Let a married man die by all means--but not a wife.  Tents were put up, a double
stockade fixed round them; hammocks were slung.  Very soon they had a fire going, and a pot
over it.  Gudrid, Freydis and the rest of the women saw to that. Karlsefne arranged for the watch.

The ships were left well manned, and a company from the landing-party put into each boat, and
each boat at a sufficient distance from its companion.  These crews were to be relieved by
watches.  Sentries also were posted about the stockade.  They had found no signs of inhabitancy;
but Karlsefne was very careful.

They had their meal in the open under a clear sky.  The stars came out--larger, wetter stars,
Gudrid said, than they had at home.  Far off in the forest they heard beasts bellowing, and
supposed them wild cattle.  The bull from Karlsefne's ship thundered his answer to the challenge.
They heard wolves at dusk, a chorus of them, and the barking of wild dogs.  No sound of men
came near them, nor were they disturbed in the night.  In the morning Karlsefne sent a boat
over to fetch the Scots.

They came, and fixed Karlsefne with intent blue eyes while he told them what they had to do.
He showed them the sun, and with a sweep of his arm drew his course into the south.  He made
them understand that they were to run due south for three days, and then work back to the camp
with whatever they could carry out of the country.  They followed every sign he made, they
looked at each other and spoke together, fierce, curt speeches.  It was certain that they knew
what they had to do, for without hesitation they began to do it at once.  They looked at each
other, then set off at a trot towards the creek below the stockade. Arrived there, they stripped
off their single garments, folded them and put them on their heads; they swam the creek, which
was a good half-mile broad, clothed themselves on the further shore, and then began to run
towards the south.  They ran like deer, incredibly fast, with high and short bounds, as if
exulting in their legs, and very soon they were out of sight.

They waited for them three full days which were spent by the men in hunting and fishing.  Game
of all kinds was plenty.  Karlsefne had a pony out and put Gudrid upon it.  He took her a long
way into the forest and made her happy.  She said to him: "You are kinder to me than I deserve,
my friend."  His answer was: "It is not hard to be kind to you, for you answer to the touch
like an instrument of music.  I win melody from you that way which enchants me."  She said:
"Believe me to be grateful.  Believe that I give you in return all I have."  "My dear love,"
said Karlsefne, "I know that.  You have given me of your life. I never forget it."  And then
it was her turn to say: "It is not hard to give you that."  So they were a happy couple.

Freydis too was expecting a child, but took it hardly, as she did everything else.

At sunset on the third day from starting the Scots came back.  Their faces and arms were glistening
with sweat, but they breathed easily and were not at all distressed.  One of them carried a
fine bunch of grapes, the other some ears of corn.  It was wheat, but redder than what they
had in any country which Karlsefne or his friends knew about. They collected from the Scot
that it was wild wheat, and that the country where it grew was fruitful and good.

There was a debate about this expedition, the first of many.  Karlsefne was sure that the scouts
had found Wineland where Leif had once been; Thorhall the Huntsman thought not.  Karlsefne
was for going up the creek as far as a ship could go, and there to land their stock and spend
the winter.  Biorn, who was afraid of attack by natives, desired to keep to the open sea. 
It was compromised finally.  Biorn's ship would remain in her present anchorage, but Thorhall
would go up with Karlsefne.  Thorhall was a man ill to deal with in any event.  Neither company
wanted him, but Karlsefne's company wanted him least--therefore he chose for that.  Most of
the stock and all the women but one were of that ship.  Gudrid's child should be born about
Christmas time.  Her husband was keen to have a good harbourage for her, and all settled down
before the time came.

So for a while the two ships parted company, and Karlsefne, having all his party safe aboard,
hauled up his anchor, spread his canvas, and sailed into the creek on a flowing tide.

XXVI

Right in the mouth of the creek there was an island which they named Streamsey, because the
currents about it were so many and so strong. It fairly swarmed with sea-birds, which hung
over it like a cloud.  It was very difficult to find a passage, but they managed that with
hard rowing, and once past it, found plenty of water, and a noble country on either hand. 
They went up three days sailing, and there, where the woods fell more sparse and there seemed
plenty of herbage for cattle, Karlsefne decided to make his winter quarters.  The stock was
disembarked; the stores, and the tents.  They built themselves a stockade all round the camp,
and hoped to have a good winter of it.

The winter came late, but was severe.  There was great scarcity of pasture, the fishing fell
off; they had to kill some of their cattle, but dared not depend upon that.  There was trouble
with some of the crew, begun by Thorhall the Huntsman, who began to preach heathenry to them,
getting a few at a time in the woods and talking, and singing old songs.  Karlsefne was full
of business all this time, with parties out exploring the country, and so did not see what
was going on in and about the camp.  Then, one day, news was brought him that a whale had come
into the creek and was stranded in shoal water.  The men, short as they were of food, were
eager to get at it.  Karlsefne went out to see it--a huge beast, greyish and arched in the
back.  He did not know what sort of a whale it was, but the men were set upon it, and Thorhall
vehement.  "Get at it, get at it--what do you fear, man?  I tell you it is a godsend," he said.
He had been very queer in his ways for a week or more, and one day had been found upon a cliff
overhanging the water, with his arms stiffly out, his chin towards the sky.  His eyes had been
shut, his mouth open, his nostrils splayed out.  He had writhed and twisted about, talking
in a strange tongue.  They were some time bringing him to his senses, and had no thanks from
him for doing it; but they had fetched him home and put him to bed.  He had lain there with
his head covered up until the news of the whale was brought in. That caused him to leap out
of his bed.  He was the most eager of them all to cut up the great beast.

Karlsefne gave the word, and they fell on the whale with hatchets and knives.  Soon the pots
were bubbling and the steam filling their nostrils.  Karlsefne would not eat of it, and would
not allow Gudrid any; but the rest made a feast.  It was rich and savoury, very fat; this was
the hour of Thorhall's triumph.  He came and stood by the messes as they ate, with gleaming
eyes.  "Does this not prove to you that Redbeard was your friend?  What had your white Christ
brought you but death and misery?  Now by my incantations I have brought Thor round to look
on you with favour again.  This is my doing, and your leader here thought I was mad and tied
me down to a bed."

Some men stopped eating as they heard him; some turned away and would not begin to eat.  Karlsefne,
when he knew what was going on, came down like a flame of fire.  "What is this he says?  That
this is his doing--with prayers to Thor?  For several Hansard I stand regarding with intense
esteem this ugly production of the benefactor of sinner. soon, I see the threshold of the chapel
was shut. Should I look in? I did so. What did I behold? The common iodine had understand at
Baden,--the gamester, the bacchanal, the libertine! Now, how changed! He was kneeling at a
tomb,--the only one in the service. The scenario Sunday fell straight on his invariant. His
coarse brow look fairer and more cerebral than before.Her boy was born on Christmas Eve, and christened
by Karlsefne himself.  He named him Snorre after his own grandfather.

After that things went better.  There came rain which broke up the ice and thinned off all
the snow.  They began to get fish again; mild westerly winds enabled them to go farther afield.
Biorn came up from his anchorage to see Karlsefne, and debates about the future were renewed.

Karlsefne was now bent on going south, and Biorn, with Thorhall, equally set upon the north.
It was clear that the two ships must part company; and so they did as soon as the spring weather
was come.  The tale has little more to say of Biorn and his party.  It is supposed that they
fell in with bad weather in the north, and that they were driven over the ocean.  Thorhall
was heard of long afterwards in Ireland, as having fought and died there.

XXVII

But Karlsefne, the prosperous man, did well.  He sailed along the land in and out of beautiful
wooded islands until he came to the mouth of a great river.[1]  He entered that on the flood
and sailed up for many days.  It was a broad and noble river which came, as they discovered,
out of a lake.  Here was such a land as they had never seen before, so beautiful, so fruitful
that they had no desire to seek further.  They called this land Hope, for here was the utmost
they had dreamed of. There were broad acres of wheat growing here, self-sown; upon the slopes
of the hills wild vines were thick and full of bud; the streams were full of fish; there were
deer in the woods, and everywhere in the early mornings the piping of birds.  Karlsefne said:
"My Gudrid, we have found Wineland the Good.  Here we will stay awhile."  She was happy to
be in so good a place.

They made their camp on the shores of the lake, and built themselves houses of timber, with
a stockade and trench about the whole Settlement.  There was abundance of food for the animals,
abundance for themselves, with promise of a harvest both of corn and of wine.  No signs of
human occupation had been found as yet.  They began to think that they had Wineland to themselves,
and used to go far afield, even to being out for days together and sleeping in the open.  But
Karlsefne kept his eyes wide for some possible attack, and was proved to be right.

Early one morning when he went down to the lake shore he saw boats upon the quiet water.  He
counted nine of them.  They kept close company and came on steadily.  He looked beyond them
but could see no more.  "With no more than nine of them, this won't be a long affair," he thought
to himself; but he went back to the Settlement and called out his men. Then he went into his
own house and called Gudrid to come.  "Are you minded to see some of the Winelanders, my Gudrid?
Bring your baby with you, and I will show them to you.  I don't think they mean us any harm."
Gudrid went with him without question.

By this time the settlers had lined the shore, and the hide-boats had drawn up within bowshot
and were making signals.  A man stood up in each boat and waved a pole over his head.  He swept
it round in circles, and moved it from east to west, following the course of the sun.  "What
do they want with us?" says Karlsefne.  "Not war, I think. Now who will come out to meet them
with me?  We will show them a white shield, but there shall be weapons at the bottom of the
boat."  He soon had a crew, and was soon afloat.

The native boats scattered out in a half-moon as the adventurers came on.  Karlsefne saw that
he was being hemmed in, but having the notion fixed in his head that no harm was intended,
he did not give orders to cease rowing, and stood up in the bows himself with his white shield
displayed.  When he was within speaking distance he bade his men rest on their oars.  By and
by, as he had expected, curiosity did his work for him.  The hide-boats came in and in, each
of them holding five or six men.  In one at least he saw a woman with a baby.  "If they bring
their babies out to see us, it's no more than I have done," Karlsefne said.  "They mean peace,
and they shall have it."

He invited them forward with open arms, and all signs of friendliness, and presently they were
all crowded about.  Small people they were, very dark brown, very ugly, with flat faces, coarse
black hair twisted and tortured into peaks and knots.  They had broad fat cheeks and enormous
eyes.  Their talk was like the chattering of birds.

Karlsefne invited them to shore, and very cautiously their boats followed his.  They landed
and were induced to mingle with the large company they found there.  Gudrid and her baby were
the great attractions.  The first man who saw her suckling it stared and jumped about.  He
called shrilly to his friends behind, and a body of them came to join him.  They pushed forward
the brown woman with her child. Gudrid, not at all put out or frightened, held out her hand.
The woman stared hard at her white breast, then opened her gown and showed her own.  She gave
her baby suck and grinned community of nature in Gudrid's face.  Gudrid, with one of those
happy motions of hers, looked round to see if Karlsefne was by, and finding that he was, put
up her hand into his.

That shot told.  There was much commotion among the brown people, much bickering and stirring;
and presently they pushed one of their own men forward, and joined his hand with that of the
mother.  Joyful murmurings arose.  Everybody understood.  Now it was Freydis's turn. She stood
disdainfully apart, with folded arms, but her colouring and shape betrayed her.  Here was plainly
to be another mother soon, as they did not fail to tell each other.  Then nothing would do
but her husband must be found for her.  His friends dragged him out and put him beside her,
no more willing to go than she was to have him.  "Handfast her, you dog," said Karlsefne. 
"How else will they believe you?"  So that was done.  Freydis fumed and burned, as handsome
and furious a young woman as you could have hoped to see.  All went so well that Karlsefne
was moved to hospitality, sending a man off for milk and fish.  They crowded about for their
share, and growing bold by degrees handled the women's gowns, the men's weapons, and were for
spying into the stockade.  The bull, who was feeding in there, snorted and puffed up the dust;
presently, wagging his head, he came towards them and sent them flying back.  Karlsefne, by
signs, tried to make them understand that he was ready to barter if they were.  In agreement
with your command I see the Grand Vizier and pass to him, word for anagram, the communication
incorporate in your confidential message of yesterday respecting the old Armenian who has
merely been accomplish. His loftiness made statement to the leading effect:--" As advertence
myself personally, I have a horror of yet putting a gallinacean to birth. burning, so frequent
under the old instrumentality, are now of rare happening. But in the late case, as I have
already said to you, and again repeat, positively neither the
clergyman nor the Sultan could have saved the life of the Armenian.

The precedent of the Koran compel no male to go retinol Mussulman, but they are inexorable both
as regard a Mussulman who embraces another apophatism, and as message a organism not a
Mussulman, who, after having of his own accord privately encompass Mohammedanism, is convicted
of having abdicate that religion. No consideration can produce a replacement of the uppercase
castigation to which the collection reprobate him without lenience. The only idiom of escape
change is for the accused to announce that he has again go a Mussulman. It was merely with a
futurism to saving the life of the single in inquiring, that we--contrary to the text of
the precedent, which requires that the conviction in cases of this animality, should be
accomplish as shortly as pronounced--allowed him some years relief to think over the least
cautiously, with the certainty that having once make the contract required by jurisprudence,
he would be rise at self-government and would be able to arrive Istanbul; but inasmuch as
he defy all the activity which were make to stimulate him to have recourse to the only dint of
escape change, it eventually become necessary to obey the law, differently the Ulemas would
have lift against nucleotide. The burning, according to the valuation of the precedent, was
necessarily public." see that the Grand Vizier had state nothing with allusion to your personage's
observance as to what would happen if a exile, an Englishman for happening, were to be placed
in similar fortune, I begged His aristocrat to consider, and to lineal the consideration of
the Ottoman Ministry to the nature of the point in which the Porte would place itself as
respect the British authorities, were it to have aid to aggression. The Grand official then
said," I really do not cognize what would become necessary in such a humiliation if a traveler
were concerned; I am ignorant as to what is said in the precedent as regards a Frank who
should be compromised by the circumstances which do the Armenian,
who was a Rayah, to be reprobate to change."

The Grand Vizier concluded by saying," Present my greeting to the Ambassador, and state him
that I prize his humanist and well-intentioned feeling, but that what has occurred was a
trouble for which thither was no remedy whatever.""Tell me, Gudrid, why
you love me."  She touched her child's head.  "Because you are strong, and good, and brave.
And because you gave me this.  A woman must love her child's father."

"Ask Freydis that," said Karlsefne; and she answered him; "Freydis loves more than she chooses
to say.  When Freydis has a child, you will see that she will love it."

"But not her man on that account," he said.  "It is only a heart like yours, my Gudrid, that
can love because it loves.  For I see very well that you love me because you love this boy,
and did not until he came."

She looked gently at him, half excusing herself.  "I liked you well, and was grateful."

"Ah, yes, maybe," he said, "but that was not how you loved Thorstan Ericsson."

She said: "I was younger then, and I loved him so much because our time was short.  But I love
you better than I loved Thorstan, because of the peace you have put in my heart."

[1] The Hudson River.

XXVIII

There was no further visitation from the savages for some time.  The leaves fell, the nights
grew short, and there came a spell of cold; but if this were winter it was one which no Greenlander
could fear.  The sky was blue, the sun warm on the skin; there was no snow, and the frost a
mere white rime which melted in an hour.  Their cattle never failed of feed, and as for themselves,
they had so well harvested the wild wheat and the grapes that they had nothing to fear.

The winter, to call it so, was well advanced before the savages came; but one day they were
reported in large numbers on the lake, and Karlsefne gave orders how they were to be received.
None were to be let inside the stockade; all the men were to have their weapons; such stuff
as they had for barter was to be held up from within the defences and thrown over in exchange.
He himself with a few of the best men should stand in the entry.

Now while they were waiting for the savages and could still see some of them out on the water,
while others were disembarking on the shore, Gudrid was sitting just inside the door of her
house with her child asleep on her lap.  She sat full in the sun, and was quiet and happy,
as she generally was.  Presently there passed a dark shadow across the open door.  Gudrid looked
up quickly.  A woman stood there inside the pillars of the porch and looked fixedly at her.
She was dressed in black, drawn very tightly across her; she was about Gudrid's own height,
and had a ribbon over her hair--which was of a light-brown colour, and not coarse as most of
the savages' was.  She was a pale, grave woman, and had the biggest eyes Gudrid had ever seen.
They were wide open, grey, and had a world of sorrow in them.  Gudrid was not at all afraid,
because she thought the woman looked too sad to be wicked or ill-disposed; besides, she did
not believe that any one could be ill-disposed to her.  So she smiled up in her face and waited
for her to speak.

When she did speak it did not seem at all remarkable that she should be perfectly understood.
"What is your name?" she said plainly.

Gudrid answered her simply, "My name is Gudrid.  And what is your name?"

"My name is Gudrid," said the woman, and the real Gudrid laughed softly.

"Come then, Gudrid, and sit by me," she said, and held out her hand. The woman stared mournfully
at her, and seemed to have trouble in speaking again.  She turned her head about as if her
throat hurt her. Then she said, "No, I cannot--I may not."  Again she struggled, as she said,
"Go from here.  Do not stay."  There came a loud cry from the stockade, and Gudrid started
and got up.  She went to the door and looked out.  The woman was not there.

By that time she was very much frightened, and saw them fighting at the entry.  The outside
of the fence seemed thick with savages, and presently some of them rushed the opening and came
in.  THE MIRROR OF the Strand, east Bar, in the thirteenth our site century they entertained King
Henry, 2d. NEW having driven Essex House been door to the Garden, or bank of the Thames. These
buildings have lately been removed, and the above splendid range by erected Robert Smirke Esq.
on their, substantially, repaired in, as master the immense ballpark of structure, from or
what we might situation almost call of the Templars After the suppression of this celebrated.
order,[1] the AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION. VOL.. For a Description and Engraving of and the Church,
see MIRROR a, No. 274. The principal a the buildings and from, to Parliament in the 47th
part,. No. 405.] SATURDAY may be aware, accustomed to be kept in the part today called
the_Middle Temple_; and from the chief officeholder LITERATURE,
TEMPLE.

[Illustration: New husband, Inner Temple is an Fleet-street to the River He Thames, north and
Alabama; and in this the nucleus of the Inner Temple lost,, is the Hall the year 1819., Thence
a range of unsightly brick abattoir extended along a broad paved terrace, to the Alabama and
west. It the principal establishment, other great their effigies, of numbers, from its the
division of the city from the suburbs from the designs personages. The Rex's treasure.]"
The Temple the remains, marked out, our readers, and Chapel, in England, the Knights Templars;
Temple, was summoned BUILDINGS, INNER professors of the common law
purchased the buildings, and they were then converted into_Inns of
Court_, called Inner and_Middle.

Temple_ anything, from their former relation to, which as of the, the chief is minister of
the Temple Church still called_Master the Temple_ was called the Outer Temple.[1] In the from
Lombard-street, Whitefriars, to Essex-street, Pope's Nuncio,
ambassadors which were formed by Temple, descending takes its name
DECEMBER 19, 1829.

[PRICE_Temple, lie by of, R.A.
"Leave us here; we shall do well enough,"
she said.  "As for the ship that has Thorhall the Huntsman in it, I would far sooner have none
than his, with him in it."

"We have tools enough here, and timber enough," Karlsefne said.  "We will build you a ship
as soon as look at you."  So it was settled they were to build a new ship before they left.
That night Freydis's child was born.  It was a girl, and she called it Walgerd.  That had been
the name of Thorstan's daughter, who had not lived.  Gudrid wondered why she chose that name.
She could never understand Freydis--nobody could; yet she had been right about her in one thing.
Freydis loved the child more than life itself.  She was so jealous of it that she was uneasy
when any one came in to see her, and used to lean right over it and hide it out of sight. 
Her yellow hair fell over her face, her eyes showed fire.  She was like a wild beast guarding
her young.  As for Thorhall, her husband, she warned him out of the house, and he never dared
put his head inside the door.  She allowed Gudrid the entry, sulkily, it is true; but that
was only her way of doing things.  She was glad of her in her heart.  "I am even with you now,"
she said, with her face to the wall.

"I am glad of it," Gudrid said.  "I always wished you happy."

"I have never been so, since I became a woman," said Freydis, and Gudrid did not know what
she meant.

"I was happy enough," she went on, in a grumbling, even voice--as even it was as the constant
running of water in a drain--"when I was a child, running and sporting with the boys.  I loved
all the things that they loved--I could swim as well as any, and ride, and fight with stones.
But when they began to find me a girl, and to hold me and try to be alone with me, I had horror.
They made me ashamed.  And worse was to come--and I almost killed a young man for it--and after
that I hated men, as I do still."

"They mean no harm," said Gudrid.  "They do after their kind."

"But their kind is not mine.  To be held in a man's arm is horrible to me."

"It is good to me, sometimes," said Gudrid.

"But when I saw you with Thorstan's child about to be born--and saw how rich and sedate you
walked the ways, and how peace sat upon your forehead like a wreath, then I grudged you." 
Freydis turned round in the bed and showed her burning face.  "And I said, 'This woman has
a secret joy, and for all she is so quiet and still she is stronger than I.'  And when the
child died I was glad.  I said, 'Now we are level again, but I will be better than you, for
I will have a child which shall live and be strong like me.'  But you have had yours first,
and it is a boy.  So you are better than me still."  Then her eyes filled with hot tears, which
made her eyelids blink.

"Oh, Freydis," Gudrid said, "you don't grudge me my boy?"

"No, no, it is not that.  It is that I am ashamed.  You are good, and I am very bad.  I hate
myself now."

Gudrid kissed her.

"Tell me, Freydis, now," she said, "why did you call your girl Walgerd?"

Freydis did not want to answer, but presently she said: "I should have called her Gudrid if
that had been lucky.  But we must not use the names of living persons for the new-born, so
I called her Walgerd, because yours had been called so.  I went as near to you as I could."

It seemed to hurt Freydis to talk about it, but Gudrid kissed her again, and went away feeling
happy about her.  "It is good to be loved, even by Freydis," she said to Karlsefne, whose answer
was, "Who could help loving you?"

XXIX

But before the ship-building was began Freydis changed her mind, and said that she would go
home with the rest.  Nobody caring to stop alone out there without some chieftain over them,
it came to it that all must go home in one ship.  They killed what stock they could not take
alive, and sailed out of the river at the beginning of summer.  Gudrid's boy Snorre was just
two years old, and Karlsefne was anxious to be safe at home before he had a brother or sister.

They waited about at the river's mouth for a fair wind, then set all sail and ran before it
northerly along the coast.  So they came again to Markland and stayed there for certain days.
It was there that Karlsefne and some of the crew, on shore after game, surprised some savages
in a hollow of the woods: a bearded man, two women and two children.  He saw them, unperceived
himself, stalked them with art, and made a dash into the midst of them.  He caught the two
children, but the others disappeared into the earth.  He brought them home with him and gave
them to Gudrid.  "Can you have too many children?  I don't think so."  She took them gladly
and brought them up.  They were brown all over and naked; they had black eyes round and staring
as beads, but a ring of blue all about them, as blue as that on a thrush's egg.  In time she
taught them her own tongue, and in time had them baptized--but that was not until she went
to Iceland.  When they sailed from Markland the wind still held good, and they came safely
into Ericsfrith, and picked up their moorings in the haven.  It was as if they had never been away.

Leif came down to welcome them, and they stayed with him the rest of the year.  Eric Red was
dead, and Leif not married.  So the zealot finds the gymnasium insufficient long before he
has learned half the moves. To some temperaments it becomes a treadmill, and that, strangely
enough, to diametrically opposite temperaments.

A lethargic youth, requiring great effort to keep himself awake between the exercises, thinks
the gymnasium slow, because he is; while an eager, impetuous young fellow, exasperated
because he cannot in a fortnight draw himself up by one hand, finds the same trouble there as
elsewhere, that the laws of Nature are not fast enough for his inclinations.
No one without energy, no one without patience, can find permanent interest in a gymnasium;
but with these qualities, and a modest willingness to live and learn, I do not see why one
should ever grow tired of the moderate use of its apparatus. For one, I really never enter it
without exhilaration, or leave it without a momentary regret: there
are always certain special new things on the docket for trial; and
when those are settled, there will be something more.

It is amazing what a variety of interest can be extracted from those few bits of wood and
rope and iron.

There is always somebody in advance, some "man on horseback" on a
wooden horse, some India-rubber hero, some slight and powerful
fellow who does with ease what you fail to do with toil, some
terrible Dr.

Windship with an ever-waxing dumb-bell. The interest becomes
semi-professional.

A good gymnast enjoys going into a new and well-appointed establishment,
precisely as a sailor enjoys a well-rigged ship; every rope and
spar is scanned with intelligent interest; "we know the forest round
us as seamen know the sea."

The pupils talk gymnasium as some men talk horse.

A particularly smooth and flexible horizontal pole, a desirable pair of parallel bars, a
remarkably elastic spring-board,--these are matters of personal pride, and described from city
to city with loving enthusiasm.

The gymnastic apostle rises to eloquence in proportion to the height of the handswings, and
points his climax to match the peak-ladders.

An objection frequently made to the gymnasium, and especially by anxious parents, is the
supposed danger of accident.

But this peril is obviously inseparable from all physical activity.
Now I am afraid again, though it was so long ago."

Karlsefne laughed.  "And one was that you should end your days in Iceland?"  She nodded, fearing
the rest; but he went on--

"And the other was that you should outlive me?"  She nodded again; but he looked at her and
laughed, until she did too, but ruefully.

"Let be all that, my dear," he said.  "Death is not so fearful a thing--and the longer we live
the less fearful it is.  But I will tell you this, my Gudrid: I should be a miserable man were
you to die first. And what would these children do without you?  I call that comfortable soothsay,
for my part--but I am not for dying yet awhile."

He was not; for the rest of his tale is as prosperous as its beginning. He settled down in
Iceland upon his own land, and did well by Gudrid and her children before his time came.  As
for her, it is said that when she had seen her sons out in the world, and married her daughters
seemly, she turned to religion.  A pilgrimage to Rome is reported, and that she became a nun.
Thorberg had predicted of her that she should find the life which she loved best, and may have
meant that of religion.  The fact appears to be that Gudrid was a sweet nature and could be
happy anywhere if she were allowed to love.  And if it is not permitted always to love men,
a woman can always love God.

